may 2015 reimagined
hiding in plain sight:
fireeye and microsoft expose
obfuscation tactic
fireeye threat intelligence and the microsoft threat intelligence center investigated a command-and-control (cnc) obfuscation
tactic used on microsoft s technet, a web portal for
it professionals. technet s security was in no way
compromised by this tactic, which is likely possible
on other message boards and forums.
fireeye threat intelligence assesses that apt17,
a china-based threat group, was behind the
attempt. other groups have used legitimate
websites to host cnc ip address in the past.
apt17 was embedding the encoded cnc ip
address for the blackcoffee malware in
legitimate microsoft technet profiles pages and
forum threads, a method some in the information
security community call a dead drop resolver. encoding the ip address makes it more difficult
to identify the true cnc address for network
security professionals.
few security companies have publicly discussed
this tactic. after discovering the blackcoffee
activity, the fireeye-microsoft team encoded
a sinkhole ip address into the profile pages and
forum threads and locked the accounts to prevent
the threat actors from making any changes. this
collaborative approach allowed the team to
observe the malware and its victims. though the
security community has not yet broadly discussed
this technique, fireeye has observed other threat
groups adopting these measures and expect
this trend to continue on other community sites.
today, fireeye released indicators of compromise
(iocs) for blackcoffee and microsoft released
signatures for its anti-malware products.
fireeye has observed the chinabased apt17 disguising their traffic
apt17, also known as deputydog, is a chinabased threat group that fireeye intelligence has
observed conducting network intrusions against
u.s. government entities, the defense industry, law
firms, information technology companies, mining
companies, and non-government organizations.
blackcoffee s functionality includes uploading
and downloading files; creating a reverse shell;
enumerating files and processes; renaming, moving,
and deleting files; terminating processes; and
expanding its functionality by adding new backdoor
commands. fireeye has monitored apt17 s use of
blackcoffee variants since 2013 to masquerade
malicious communication as normal web traffic by
disguising the cnc communication as queries to
web search engines.
threat actors cnc: from obviously
malicious to thoughtfully
obfuscated
the use of blackcoffee demonstrates threat
actors evolving use of public websites to hide
in plain sight. in the past, threat actors would
modify easily compromised websites to host cnc
commands and configuration, as observed in the
china-based apt1 s webcnc suite of backdoors.
now, threat actors are using well-known
websites that they do not need to compromise to host cnc ip addresses. they simply use the
website for legitimate purposes, such as posting
forum threads or creating profile pages.
apt17 went further to obfuscate their cnc ip
address and employed a multi-layered approach
for the malware to finally beacon the true cnc
ip. they used legitimate infrastructure the
ability to post or create comments on forums and
profile pages to embed a string that the malware
would decode to find and communicate with the
true cnc ip address. this additional obfuscation
puts yet another layer between apt17 and the
security professionals attempting to chase them
down.
how blackcoffee works
this blackcoffee variant contains one or
more urls that link to the biography sections of
attacker-created profiles as well as forum threads
that contain comments from those same profiles.
a url is randomly selected and the malware
searches at that location for an encoded ip
address located between two tags, @micr0s0ft and c0rp0rati0n .
using microsoft technet, a web portal for it professionals,
apt17 posted in forum threads and created profle pages to
host encoded cnc ip addresses that would direct a variant
of the blackcoffee backdoor to their cnc server.
figure 1: the encoded ip address
actual command
and control
traffic is sent
to the decoded
cnc ip
apt17 s malicious use of technet
the malware then communicates directly with the retrieved and decoded
ip address to receive commands and send stolen information. if the cnc
server is discovered or shut down, the threat actors can update the encoded
ip address on technet to maintain control of the victims machines.
blackcoffee supports an initial set of fifteen commands, including
creating a reverse shell, uploading and downloading files, and enumerating
files and processes. the attackers can also extend blackcoffee s
functionality through additional commands sent as shellcode.
expect more threat groups to employ legitimate
websites in operations
we have already observed threat actors adopting similar techniques and
moving some cnc activity to legitimate websites that they do not need to
compromise. in the same vein, some threat actors have already begun using
social media sites such as twitter and facebook for malware distribution and
cnc. apt17 s tactic using a dead drop resolver and embedding encoded
ip addresses as opposed to displaying it in plain text can delay detection,
discourage it staff from discovering the actual cnc ip address, and prevent
discovery of the cnc ip via binary analysis. fireeye expects that threat groups
are already using this technique, with their own unique variations, and others
will adopt similar measures to hide in plain sight.
apt17 encodes an ip address a technet forum thread modified by blackcoffee:
on a newly created technet
profile or encodes the ip
address on a forum thread
using one of their profiles
blackcoffee checks the altered
technet page for encoded tag
containing address of cnc server
encoded command and control server
ip is sent back to blackcoffee on
the victim s computer
blackcoffee is capable
of uploading, downloading,
renaming, moving, or deleting
files, terminating processes, or
adding new backdoor commands
the victim s network
security monitors see
traffic from technet
cnc server
victim infected with
blackcoffeeto download this or other