
the hidden lynx group is a professional team of attackers with advanced capabilities. theywere responsible for the compromise of security firm bit9 s digital code-signing certificatewhich was used to sign malware. the bit9 breach was part of the much larger vohocampaign and that campaign was just one of many operations undertaken by the group overthe last four years.the group likely offers a hackers for hire operation and is tasked with retrieving specificinformation from a wide range of corporate and government targets. they are a highlyefficient team who can undertake multiple campaigns at once, breach some of the world sbest-protected organizations and can change their tactics quickly to achieve their goal.they usually attack using multiple customized trojans designed for specific purposes.backdoor.moudoor is used for larger campaigns and has seen widespread distribution whiletrojan.naid is reserved for special operations against high value targets. the group usescutting-edge attack techniques which makes this team stand out from other major attackgroups.this paper takes an in-depth look at the hidden lynx group, their targets and theirmotivations. it will look into their capabilities and attack strategies through their attackcampaigns including the bit9 incident. overview
a well-knowngroup withaffiliations to operationaurora managedto break into bit9 snetwork usingan sql injectionattack. background
hidden lynx professional hackers for hire background in february 2013, bit9 released a statement revealing that in july 2012, their network had been compromised bya malicious third-party. a well-known group named hidden lynx with affiliations to operation aurora managedto break into bit9 s network using an sql injection attack. these trojans made their way into the defenseindustrial sector.however, the bit9 compromise was only a small piece of a much larger watering-hole operation known as thevoho campaign, which impacted hundreds of organizations in the united states. further, the voho campaignitself was just one campaign of many that is attributable to this incredibly prolific group. each campaign isdesigned to access information in governmental and commercial organizations that tend to operate in thewealthiest and most technologically advanced countries in the world. who are the hidden lynx group? the hidden lynx group has been in operation since at least 2009 and is most likely a professional organizationthat offers a hackers for hire service. they have the capability to attack many organizations with concurrentlyrunning campaigns. they operate efficiently and move quickly and methodically. based on these factors, thehidden lynx group would need to be a sizeable organization made up of between 50 and 100 individuals.the members of this group are experts at breaching systems. they engage in a two-pronged strategy of massexploitation and pay-to-order targeted attacks for intellectual property using two trojans designed specificallyfor each purpose: team moudoor distributes backdoor.moudoor, a customized version of gh0st rat , for large-scale campaignsacross several industries. the distribution of moudoor requires a sizeable number of people to both breachtargets and retrieve the information from the compromised networks. team naid distributes trojan.naid, the trojan found during the bit9 incident, which appears to be reservedfor more limited attacks against high value targets. this trojan was leveraged for a special operation duringthe voho campaign and is probably used by a specific team of highly skilled attackers within the group. thistrojan was also found as part of operation aurora in 2009.much of the attack infrastructure and tools used during these campaigns originate from network infrastructurein china. the hidden lynx group makes regular use of zero-day exploits and has the ability to rework andcustomize exploits quickly. they are methodical in their approach and they display a skillset far in advance ofsome other attack groups also operating in that region, such as the comment crew (also known as apt1). thehidden lynx group is an advanced persistent threat that has been in operation for at least four years and isbreaking into some of the best-protected organizations in the world. with a zero-day attack already under theirbelt in 2013, they continue to operate at the leading edge of targeted attacks.
the diverse setof targets from avariety of sectorswould indicatethat this group isnot focused on anyone specific task. who are their targets?
who are their targets? since november 2011, hundredsof organizations worldwide havebeen targeted by the hidden lynxgroup. these organizations haveremained relatively consistent duringthis time period. the group targetsorganizations operating in both thecommercial sector and within alllevels of government. the diverse setof targets from a variety of sectorswould indicate that this group is notfocused on any one specific task. thegroup manages concurrent campaignsin attacks that are global in nature.the hidden lynx group has mostrecently conducted attacks againstspecific organizations in south koreaand has a long history of attacking thedefense industrial sector of westerncountries.the top 10 organizations categorizedby the verticals they belong to areshown in figure 1.the most targeted countries/regionsare shown in figure 2. what is their motivation? this broad range of targetedinformation would indicate that theattackers are part of a professionalorganization. they are likelytasked with obtaining very specificinformation that could be used togain competitive advantages at botha corporate and nation state is unlikely that this organizationengages in processing or using thestolen information for direct financialgain. their mode of operation wouldsuggest that they may be a privateorganization of hackers for hire ,who are highly skilled, experiencedprofessionals whose services areavailable for those willing to pay. figure 1. top 10 organizations targeted by the hidden lynx group sincenovember 2011figure 2. countries/regions targeted by the hidden lynx group since november 2011 corporate espionage the financial services sector has been identified as the most heavily targeted industry overall. there is atendency to target specific companies within this sector. investment banks and asset management agenciesaccount for the majority of organizations targeted within this industry. the absence of certain types of financialinstitutions, such as those operating as commercial banks, clearly indicates that the attacks are focusing onspecific areas. the organizations involved would have expertise in large corporate deals, such as confidentialinformation on upcoming mergers and acquisitions, which could be used to gain a competitive edge. targetingthis sector in such a concentrated fashion could provide invaluable information when negotiating large takeoversor trading shares on the stock exchange.attacks on the financial sector are not limited to investment banks. stock trading firms and one of the world slargest stock exchanges have been subjected to attacks from this group. the hidden lynx group has alsoundertaken indirect attacks through the supply chains. organizations that supply hardware, secure networkcommunications and services specific to the financial sector have also come under attack. there is almostcertainly a financial motivation behind these attacks. attacks against government contractors in attacks that have targeted all levels of government from local to national level, this group has repeatedlyattempted to infiltrate these networks. attacks against government contractors and, more specifically, thedefense industry indicate that the group is in pursuit of confidential information and suggests that the grouphad been working for nation states.targeting advanced technologies in specific areas such as aerospace would be useful in order to closetechnological gaps or gain knowledge of the advanced capabilities of other nation states. attacks onorganizations that operate in the internet services space can provide a wealth of valuable information. the grouphad affiliations to operation aurora (see appendix for more details), a campaign that targeted a number oforganizations including software manufacturers and defense contractors. more recently, microsoft claimed thatthe target was databases containing emails marked for court order wiretaps. they believe that these attackswere counter-intelligence operations, activities that would provide benefits at a nation state level. what are they capable of? the group s tools, tactics and procedures are innovative and typically cutting-edge. they use custom tools andtechniques that they tailor to meet their objectives and maximize their chance of success. they attack public-facing infrastructure and have been observed installing highly customized trojans that are purpose-built forstealth. they engineered one of the most successful watering-hole attacks to-date. they also undertake spear-phishing attacks and hack supply chains in order to distribute their custom trojans. this is an established teamwith years of experience. they are well resourced and highly skilled.the hidden lynx group s advanced capabilities are clearly demonstrated in three major campaigns. in the vohocampaign, they showed how they could subvert bit9 s established trust models. in the finsho campaign, theymanaged to get advanced knowledge of a zero-day exploit and in the scadef operation, they undertook supplychain attacks to succeed in their campaign. subverting trust protection models the team can adapt rapidly to counter-measures that would otherwise hinder the success of a campaign. theattack on bit9 showed how the group could bypass solid trust protection models to get to their targets. however,this attack was only a small part of the larger voho campaign, where the group proved how quickly they canadapt and change their tactics in the face of new and unforeseen obstacles. the bit9 incident bit9 is a security company headquartered in waltham, massachusetts. as an alternative to traditionalsignature-based antivirus solutions, bit9 offers a trust-based security platform that runs off of a cloud-basedreputation service combined with policy-drivenapplication control and whitelisting to protect againstcyberthreats. as a result, it is difficult for a maliciousthird-party to install an untrusted application, suchas a remote access trojan (rat), onto a systemthat is adequately protected with the bit9 platform.undaunted by this, the elite hidden lynx group tookup the challenge.on february 8 2013, bit9 released details revealingthat a malicious third-party had gained access to oneof their digital code-signing certificates. during thisincident, a number of trojans and malicious scriptswere signed. in a follow up post on february 25, moredetails of the attack emerged. in july 2012, more thansix months earlier, a malicious third-party gainedaccess to their network using an sql injection attack.due to an operational oversight, a public-facingserver that wasn t protected with the bit9 platformallowed the attackers to gain unauthorized access.the attackers installed backdoor.hikit, a trojanthat provides extremely stealthy remote access tocompromised systems. this highly customized trojanis typically installed onto servers in the victims dmz,which was the case at bit9. credentials for anothervirtual machine were then stolen. these were usedto access the virtual machine that contained one ofbit9 s digital code-signing certificates. the attackersused this code-signing infrastructure to signthirty-two malicious files. symantec telemetryshows some of these files have been presentwithin select organizations in the united statesdefense industrial sector.the signing of these files is significant, sincethey could then be used to circumvent thetrust protection model offered by the bit9platform. the trojans signed include variantsof backdoor.hikit (the remote access trojanused in the initial compromise) and anotherrat called trojan.naid. some malicious attackscripts were also signed. each trojan has aspecific purpose. backdoor.hikit was used totarget public-facing infrastructure while trojan.naid was used to perform highly targetedattacks through email and watering-holes.bit9 was alerted to the compromise in january2013 and took immediate containment stepssuch as revoking the digital signature andreaching out to their entire customer base.according to bit9, the attacks that followed figure 3. trojan.naid bit9 digital certific ate, july 13,2012, provided by symantec s cafigure 4. trojans successfully acquired with command-and-control (c&c) servers from the bit9 investigation were not financially motivated, but rather were an attempt to access information. on bit9 s own admission,three customers were conjunction with the bit9 compromise, the hidden lynx group had another significant campaign well underway. they had just concluded phase one of the voho campaign, a watering-hole operation orchestrated toattack organizations in the boston, massachusetts area it was a likely a distribution vector for the newly signedfiles. the voho campaign the voho campaign, first publicized by rsa, is one of thelargest and most successful watering-hole attacks to date.the campaign combined both regional and industry-specificattacks and predominantly targeted organizations thatoperate in the united states. in a rapidly spreading two-phase attack, which started on june 25 and finished july 18,nearly 4,000 machines had downloaded a malicious payload.these payloads were being delivered to unsuspectingvictims from legitimate websites that were strategicallycompromised.this watering-hole infection technique was quite innovativeat the time. in a watering-hole attack, the attackercompromises a legitimate website that the target uses andtrusts. the attacker then lies in wait for the target to visitthe compromised site in order to infect them. the scale andtargeted nature of the voho campaign set it apart fromwatering-hole attacks observed in the past. the group firstadopted this technique in december 2011 when an exploitfor the oracle java se rhino script engine remote code execution vulnerability (cve-2011-3544) was leveraged to distribute their payloads. as a result of their success, manyother strategic compromises havebeen adopted by other attack groups,as seen in a notable attack targetingios developers earlier in 2013 whichimpacted employees at facebook,apple and the voho campaign, ten legitimatewebsites were strategicallycompromised. the attackers carefullyselected these websites based onthe likelihood that the intendedtarget(s) would visit them during theexploit delivery phase. the attackerslikely pre-determined who visitedthe watering-hole in advance of thedistribution phase of attack. thiscould easily be achieved by examiningthe access logs of compromised webservers. the categories of websitescompromised were both regionaland industry-specific in nature andtargeted the following key areasillustrated in figure 5. figure 5. the voho campaign target regions andindustriesfigure 6. the voho campaign malicious activity timeline -a two-phase attack timeline of activity the voho watering-hole distributed remote access trojans in two phases. in phase one of the attack, an internetexplorer zero-day vulnerability, the microsoft xml core services remote code execution vulnerability was leveraged. on july 10, microsoft introduced the patch for and activity at the watering-hole ceased. this appears to have been a clever decision on behalf of the attackers.if they continued to deliver the exploit, they risked detection and would have hurt their chances of retainingaccess to the watering-hole for phase two of the campaign. within six days, phase two of the distribution began,this time using a malicious java applet exploiting the oracle java se remote code execution vulnerability this java exploit was patched at the time. having already used two zero-day exploits in quick succession (the first zero-day exploit was used in the gotham campaign in may 2012, seeappendix for more details), the hidden lynx group may not have had another one at their disposal.the timeline of activity at the watering-hole is shown in figure 6.in each phase of the attack, two trojans were being distributed at different intervals. the customized versionof gh0st rat , backdoor.moudoor, saw large-scale distribution in comparison to trojan.naid, which was usedmore selectively in these attacks.before being used in the second phase of the attack, trojan.naid was signed with the bit9 certificate. moudoorwas never observed during the attack on bit9, which could indicate that two separate teams are at workhere. with moudoor and naid using different command-and-control (c&c) servers, each team could workindependently on alternative objectives. the discovery of the naid c&c would also be less likely in comparisonto moudoor s, as its large-scale distribution would inevitably create more noise as it continued to impact manyorganizations. figure 7. the voho campaign trojans distributed and c&c servers used to command and control team naid s role during this campaign, team naid had a very specific objective to gain access to information from organizationsoperating in the defense industrial sector. an unsigned version of naid was distributed to select victims withinthe defense industrial sector during phase one until microsoft supplied a patch for on july 10. itmay have been during this phase of the attack when the team realized the information they sought was held byorganizations protected by bit9. as the team found it difficult to compromise bit9-protected computers and hadno viable exploit for distribution, their immediate objective focused on bit9 s digital code-signing july 13, just a few days after they started their attacks on bit9, they obtained the bit9-signed naid. by thenext day, they had built a viable java exploit to distribute their trojan. armed with the newly-signed trojan anddelivery vehicle, the group resumed malicious activity at the watering-hole for three days from july 16. it wasduring this period that three organizations protected with the bit9 platform were successfully this campaign, naid was specifically reserved for special operations against high value targets. team naid sobjective was narrow and focused and the team aimed to limit naid s exposure. the sophistication of theoverall attack is typical of attackers with a very high pedigree. the team is clearly highly skilled; they operatemethodically and can switch objectives at a moment s notice. they rapidly adapted to external factors that werehindering their specific objective and pursued a difficult prize - the bit9 certificate - in order to achieve theiroverall goal. team moudoor s role the distribution of moudoorduring this campaign was on amuch larger scale. organizationsoperating in the financial sector,all levels of government (local andfederal), healthcare, educationand law were impacted duringthis campaign. there is a wealthof sensitive information withinthese organizations which wouldbe of interest to both nation statesand entities that would benefitfrom information as a result ofcorporate espionage attacks.the top distinct infections perorganization type are shown infigure 8.a campaign distributing moudooron such a large scale wouldrequire a sizeable team tooperate and maintain remoteaccess to these compromisedcomputers. the breach phaseof the operation could easilybe handled by a smaller team,which then passes control to alarger team of operators who cantraverse networks and retrieve theinformation they are tasked withgaining access to. to efficiently figure 8. industries with the most backdoor.moudoor infections during thevoho campaign attack this many organizations concurrently would require an equally large number of operators. these trojansrequire manual operation so it s conceivable that tens if not hundreds of operators would be used post-breach toprocess and handle the stolen data.the voho campaign is one of a number of campaigns attributed to this group over the last four years. it showedhow quickly the group could change their strategy and the lengths they would go to get to their targets. the factthat the bit9 code-signing certificate breach was only a small part of this campaign shows how adaptable anddetermined the group is. advanced zero-day access the group is highly organized and can gain advanced access to zero-day vulnerabilities. in february, the hiddenlynx group used this advanced knowledge to take advantage of the oracle java se remote code execution vulnerability to attack japanese targets in the finsho campaign. finsho within two days of bit9 sblog post on february25, the attackers begandistributing moudoorand naid in a campaign that leveraged . interestingly, the c&c server configured innaid was also configured ina sample found in thebit9 incident. althoughthe version used againstbit9 was not observedelsewhere in the wild,the group s methodicalapproach would indicatethat a similar campaignmay have been intendedfor that trojan.the timeline for exploitdevelopment anddistribution is illustratedin figure 9.according to oracle s blog, was reported tothem on february 1, the same daythat class files exploiting it wereadded to shown infigure 10. in past java exploitsused by this group, the code wasalready public knowledge and apatch was already available for thesoftware. in this case, they gainedadvanced knowledge from an unknown source - a source with early access to the exploit conditions, possibly onthe same day as oracle. oracle released the fix for on march 4. used to distribute naid and subsequently moudoorfigure 9. timeline of activity for distributing moudoor and naidin the finsho campaign figure 11 illustrates therelationship between finshoand the bit9 incident through theshared c&c server used in bothnaid configurations.alternate c&c servers and separatewebsites for distribution providefurther evidence that there aredistinctions between how theseteams operate. supply chain attacks the hidden lynx group continuedto attack the defense industrypost-voho. in another campaignnamed scadef, manufacturersand suppliers of military-gradecomputers were observed installinga trojanized intel driver application. scadef the attackers bundled this intel driver application with variants of backdoor.moudoor using a popular chinesearchiving application called haozip. the attackers likely compromised a legitimate download of this driverapplication from a non-reputable source but the true source was never discovered in this investigation.the technique is anotheravenue into hardenednetworks of interest.they attack not onlyhardware suppliers, butcontractors that mayaccess these networksduring their course ofwork. the group seeksout the weakest link inthe chain and simply liesin wait. in these specificattacks, they simplywait for a shipment ofcompromised computersto be installed into thetargeted network. uniquedetections observedfor these trojanizedapplications arepresented in figure 12.the voho, finsho and scadef campaigns each showed how efficient and adaptable the group is when focusing ontheir targets. they use a wide range of advanced attack methods and change their strategy when required to carryout each operation. these three campaigns are only some of the operations undertaken by the hidden lynx group,making them a credible threat to several industries. figure 12. supply chain hacking detections in the it supply/defense/healthcare industryfigure 11. used to distribute trojan.naid andbackdoor.moudoor (february/march 2013) in the finsho campaign conclusion from the evidenceseen, it s clearthat hiddenlynx belongs toa professionalorganization. conclusion cyberespionage campaigns are becoming increasingly common, with countless threat actors attempting to gainfootholds into some of the best-protected organizations. these attacks are becoming increasingly sophisticated.the capabilities and tactics used by these threat actors vary considerably. the hidden lynx group is capableof undertaking focused attacks against niche targets and running large-scale campaigns targeting multipleorganizations on a global scale. they have seen action in numerous campaigns since 2009 and repeatedly attacktheir targets with cutting-edge techniques. they quickly adapt to security counter-measures and are highlymotivated. they are one of the most well-resourced and capable attack groups in the targeted threat landscape.from the evidence seen, it s clear that hidden lynx belongs to a professional organization. they operate in a highlyefficient manner. they can attack on multiple fronts. they use the latest techniques, have access to a diverse setof exploits and have highly customized tools to compromise target networks. their attacks, carried out with suchprecision on a regular basis over long periods of time, would require a well-resourced and sizeable organization.they possess expertise in many areas, with teams of highly skilled individuals who can adapt rapidly to the changinglandscape. this team could easily consist of 50-100 individuals. this level of resources would be needed to buildthese trojans, maintain infection and c&c infrastructure and pursue confidential information on multiple networks.they are highly skilled and experienced campaigners in pursuit of information of value to both commercial andgovernmental organizations.the incident in bit9, which ultimately led to successful compromises of hard-to-crack targets during the vohocampaign, only serves to highlight this fact. the evolving targeted attack landscape is becoming increasinglysophisticated. as organizations implement security counter-measures, the attackers are adapting at a rapid rate.with a growing number of threat actors participating in these campaigns, organizations have to understand thatsophisticated attackers are working hard to bypass each layer of security. it s no longer safe to assume that any onesolution will protect a company s assets. a variety of solutions need to be combined and, with a better understandingof the adversary, tailored to adequately protect the information of most interest to the attackers.the hidden lynx group s mission is large and they re targeting a diverse set of information. the frequency anddiversity of these attacks would indicate that the attackers are tasked with sourcing information from manyorganizations. these tasks are likely distributed within the team. the group s goal is to gain access to informationwithin organizations in some of the wealthiest and most technologically advanced countries across the globe. it isunlikely that they can use this information for direct financial gain, and the diversity of the information and numberof distinguishable campaigns would suggest that they are contracted by multiple clients. this leads us to believe thatthis is a professional organization that offers a hackers for hire service.the worrying knock-on effect of this group s activities is that other threat actors are learning and adopting theirtechniques. the hidden lynx group is not basking in their past glories, they are continuing to refine and streamlinetheir operations and techniques to stay one step ahead of their competition. organizations that are being attackedon multiple fronts need to better protect the information that is most valuable to them. we expect these attackersto be involved in many more high profile campaigns in the coming years. they will continue to adapt and innovate. they will continue to provide information servicing interests at both a corporate and state level. groups like hiddenlynx are certainly winning some of the battles, but as organizations gain a better understanding of how these groupsoperate, they can take steps to help prevent their most valuable information from falling into attackers hands. appendix appendix related attacks the three campaigns thathave already been examinedin detail are only a snapshot ofthe group s activities. since thetime they adopted moudoor inlate 2011, persistent attacksagainst organizations acrossthe globe have been occurringon a regular basis, even to thisday. these attackers pioneeredthe watering-hole technique,however they can also fall backto more traditional methods ofattack, such as spear-phishingemails, supply chain attacks andtrojanized software updates.since 2011, the hidden lynxgroup has leveraged fivebrowser-based exploits for payload distribution, three of which were zero-day exploits.the list of browser-basedexploits used by the hiddenlynx group since theintroduction of moudoor ispresented in table 1.in the first half of 2012,there was a particularly highdistribution of moudoor. therewas a peak in june/july as aresult of the voho campaignwhich is evident in the graphshown in figure 13.there is also a peak at thebeginning of the year whichis a result of another highdistribution campaign calledwsdhealthy. this campaign,along with some other notableattacks and techniques, willbe discussed in the followingsections. gotham shared distribution, shared c&c yet another zero day exploit wsdhealthy watering-hole campaigns pre-dating voho by seven months easyupdate trojanizing a popular p2p software s updates gotham campaigns running concurrently on may 30th, the hidden lynx group used their first zero-day exploit of 2012, taking advantage of the microsoft internet explorer same id property remote code execution vulnerability in order to distribute moudoor and naid from , a website devoted to the history of new york. this was atwo-phase attack which saw team naid and team moudoor share c&c infrastructure in a smallercampaign that infected organizations in the following industries: financial services information communications technology government marketing information technology aerospace/defense energymany of the industriestargeted in thiscampaign are similarto those targeted inthe voho campaign,so this could beconsidered as apre-cursor to thatcampaign. similar tovoho, this was a two-phased attack thatleveraged two internetexplorer zero-daysfor distribution similarto voho, as microsoftpatched cve-2012-1875, the attackershalted distribution.this preventedany unnecessarysuspicious activity from being identified that couldimpact future activity from the compromised website.a timeline for this activity is presented in figure 14.sharing c&c infrastructure could indicate that bothteams were working closely together and may havedivided up the effort during this campaign. duringphase two of this campaign, voho began. the hiddenlynx group is clearly resourced to operate andmaintain distribution and c&c infrastructure acrossmultiple campaigns. this level of organization requiresdiscipline at multiple levels within the group. thisis not a small group of elite hackers this is a well-organized professional organization.one campaign that rivals voho in terms of size iswsdhealthy. this is the first campaign where we seethe group using naid and moudoor together sharinginfrastructure and the first links to the bit9 incident figure 14. activity timeline on figure 15. moudoor and naid share distribution andcommand and control servers start to emerge. wsdhealthy shared infrastructure with the bit9 incident the hidden lynx group beganusing watering-hole attacksas early as december 2011.although no zero-day exploitwas available, they used apatched java exploit effectively todistribute moudoor from threecompromised websites. thiscampaign provided the firstindications that the group wasusing both moudoor and naidto attack targets and sharec&c infrastructure. along withthis, early links to the attackson bit9 began to emerge.the timeline of this activity isshown in figure these campaigns, thehidden lynx group madeheavy use of infrastructure inhong kong, with the exceptionof . this isthis domain that links to thebit9 attack, as it resolvedto a c&cserver used by the backdoor.hikit sample installed afterthe successful sql injectionattack on bit9. moudoor wasbeing actively distributed fromthese websites for two, fourand five months respectively.these are exceptionally longperiods of time to retain accessto compromised servers forpayload distribution of thisnature. the c&c servers used and thelinks between the trojans andbit9 are shown in figure 17.team moudoor heavily relieson a dynamic dns servicecalled dtdns to rapidlyswitch between c&c fact, they use direct ipconnections or dtdnsexclusively to establish c&ccommunications, with the figure 16. timeline of malicious activity associated with the first links between moudoor and naid emerge exception of which is a registered domain.the hidden lynx group usestechniques which have clearlybeen established throughexperience to maintain thisinfrastructure for long periods oftime. they adapt quickly and likelyhave a stockpile of c&c serversthat they can quickly switch towhich provides maximum uptimeduring any given operation.along with this, the hidden lynxgroup uses several differentmethods to infect their the scadef campaign, we sawhow the group bundled moudoorwith legitimate software to infecttargets. they also managed totrojanize software updates aswell, as seen in the easyupdatecampaign where a chinesep2p application was observedselectively installing moudoorsince 2011. easyupdate atrojanized softwareupdate since november 2011, the hiddenlynx group has been able to insertmoudoor into the distributionchain of one of the most popularchinese p2p applications providedby . there is a verylow distribution of trojanizedupdates and it is quite likely thatthey are somehow selectivelyinstalling moudoor on specificclients. this is, without a doubt,the longest running distributionvector for the group, whichinfected victims predominantly inchina, the united states and hongkong.these are the earliest indicationsof moudoor infections, with kissnada being one of the firstdtdns domains observed in use.this distribution vector s exactpurpose is still unclear, howeverit s certainly linked to the group, percentage breakdown of unique detections from verycd p2p clientfigure 19. moudoor variants downloaded through p2p client updates as we have observed moudoorsamples in wsdhealthyconfigured to use and usa- for c&ccommunications.the hidden lynx grouphas left a clear fingerprintfor the past two years withclearly identifiable links tothe group s activities. theuse of customized trojans,shared distribution andc&c infrastructure, coupledwith repeated attacks ona predictable set of targetorganizations has alloweda more complete picture ofthese attacks to be compiled. asummary of the links betweenall of these attacks is presentedin figure 20. trojans used by thehidden lynx group the following section lists thetrojans that were used by thehidden lynx group throughouttheir various campaigns. backdoor.moudoor in 2011, the hidden lynxgroup began to use backdoor. moudoor. this is a customized version of gh0st rat .gh0st rat variants havebeen used in cyberespionagecampaigns emanating fromchina for years. in 2009,information warfare monitorpublished a detailed report, tracking ghostnet , following an investigationinto a cyberespionage network of more than 1,000compromised computers affecting more than 100countries. many threat actors use customized versions ofthis rat for cyberespionage operations. trojan.naid the team uses trojan.naid for special operations. itfirst appeared in may 2009 and has been used in manyhigh profile attacks over the past four years. it shares figure 20. linking the group s activity . naid/vasport obfuscation tool technical similarities with other trojans which also originate from china. all of these trojans are potentially fromthe same group or they may source these trojans from the same developer. the technical similarities are based on ashared file creation template and c&c protocol.the other trojans that share these traits are: backdoor.vasport backdoor.boda file creation template _ p.ax command and control template post keep-alivelynxthere is also evidence thatbackdoor.vasport and trojan.naid have shared the samepacker to obfuscate thepayloads from av detection.the obfuscation tool used isalso chinese in origin and hasa simple user interface to helppack these trojans.naid also has a history of usingstolen digital certificates toovercome trust-based protectionwhen attacking certain hardenedtargets. some of the certificatesidentified are shown in figure 22. backdoor.vasport backdoor.vasport was delivered by exploiting the adobe flash player cve-2012-0779 objecttype confusion remote codeexecution vulnerability this was delivered in malicious word documentsin targeted attack emails. theexploit component used in theseattacks was also used in the elderwood platform. table 2 shows the payload fromthe malicious word documents. backdoor.boda in a more recent campaign called ladyboyle, backdoor.boda was being distributed to take advantage of the adobe figure 22. stolen digital certificates used by trojan.naid table 2. backdoor.vasport payload from malicious word documents pe timestamp flash player remote memory corruption vulnerability these files were signed with a digital signature from mgame corporation, a tactic used previously by the attackers. interestingly,backdoor.boda andbackdoor.vasport were bothdistributed using flash zero-day exploits in embeddeddocuments. it s plausiblethat the group has a teamdedicated to distributionusing flash exploits thatcustomizes trojans from thesame code base that the naiduses. trojan.hydraq(operation aurora) the hidden lynx group hasused cutting-edge attacktechniques and a consistentmethodology. trojan.naidhas been in use since 2009and hidden lynx attacksbear the hallmarks of acampaign that involved yetanother internet explorerzero-day exploit in december2009. trojan.naid wasused in the infamousattacks on organizations inthe financial, technology,internet and media sectorscalled operation aurora .these attacks are linkedwith another trojan called trojan.hydraq, but naid was downloaded in stage three ofthe operation.trojan.hydraq disappearedfrom the targeted attacklandscape shortly afteroperation aurora, most likelydue to the close attentionthat it was receiving fromsecurity researchers. trojan.naid did not meet the same fate, as it is still being used in sophisticated targetedattacks to this day. figure 23. trojan.naid links to hydraq and operation aurora many different symantec protection technologies play a role in defending against this threat, including: file-based protection (traditional antivirus) traditional antivirus protection is designed to detect and block malicious files and is effective against files associated with this attack. trojan.hydraq backdoor.moudoor trojan.naid backdoor.hikit backdoor.vasport backdoor.boda symantec protection file-based protectionsymantecendpoint protectionnorton360nortoninternet securitynortonantivirusnetwork-based protectionbehavior-based protectionreputation-based protectionnorton safewebdownload insightapplication & device controlbrowser protection network-based protection (ips) network-based protection in symantec endpoint protection can help protect against unauthorized network activities conducted by malware threats or intrusion attempts. web attack: oracle java rhino script engine web attack: oracle java rhino script engine web attack: msie same id property web attack: msie same id property 2 web attack: msie msxml web attack: msie msxml web attack: msie msxml web attack: msie msxml web attack: java rce web attack: java web attack: oracle java type confusion attack web attack: oracle java se remote code execution vulnerability attack: java attack: java behavior-based protection behavior-based detection blocks suspicious processes using the bloodhound.sonar series of detections reputation-based protection (insight) norton safeweb blocks users from visiting infected websites. insight detects and warns against suspicious files as ws.reputation.1 