
a research team at the microsoft malware protection center (mmpc)
proactively monitors the threat landscape for emerging threats. part of this job
involves keeping tabs on targeted attack groups, which are often the first ones
to introduce new exploits and techniques that are later used widely by other
attackers. one such group, which microsoft has code-named strontium, is of
particular interest because of its aggressive, persistent tactics and techniques,
and its repeated use of new zero-day exploits to attack its targets. microsoft is
sharing some of the information it has gathered on this prominent attack group
in the hope that it will raise awareness of the group s activities and help
organizations take immediate advantage of available mitigations that can
significantly reduce the risks that they face from this and similar groups. adversary profile strontium has been active since at least 2007. whereas most modern
untargeted malware is ultimately profit-oriented, strontium mainly seeks
sensitive information. its primary institutional targets have included government
bodies, diplomatic institutions, and military forces and installations in nato
member states and certain eastern european countries. additional targets have
included journalists, political advisors, and organizations associated with political
activism in central asia. strontium is microsoft s code name for this group,
following its internal practice of assigning chemical element names to activity
groups; other researchers have used code names such as apt28,1 sednit,2
sofacy,3 and fancy bear as labels for a group or groups that have displayed activity similar to the activity observed from strontium. the group s persistent
use of spear phishing tactics and access to previously undiscovered zero-day
exploits have made it a highly resilient threat. how strontium attacks a target strontium primarily uses two kinds of attack. it uses spear phishing phishing
attempts targeted at specific individuals to perform reconnaissance and steal whereas most
modern
untargeted
malware is
ultimately profit-
oriented,
strontium
mainly seeks
sensitive
information. login credentials to gather information about potential high-
value targets associated with the institution under attack.
following the reconnaissance phase, it uses a variety of
methods to infect the computers of high-value targets with
malware, often by exploiting previously unknown vulnerabilities
in browser add-ons and other software. reconnaissance and target identification strontium typically begins its attack on an institution by
identifying and profiling potential victims with connections to
the institution. microsoft has seen indications that strontium
relies on open-source intelligence (osint), such as email lists
and information harvested from public forums or social
networking sites, to identify targets for spear phishing. microsoft
also believes that strontium relies on past successful phishing
attacks to augment its dataset, by making use of any email communications it can identify between prior targets and the current target. strontium casts a wide net with its reconnaissance activities, seeking login
credentials for email and other systems from a large number of people, which it
then weeds through to assess its value. microsoft believes strontium used its
spear phishing attacks to target several thousand individuals during the first half
of 2015. although strontium isn t choosy with its targets, it is persistent. when
strontium identifies an individual to target, the group will repeatedly conduct
spear phishing attacks against it over a long duration, possibly a year or more,
until one of the attempts succeeds. strontium s spear phishing modus operandi focuses on making the recipient
concerned about unauthorized use of an account. a recent attack campaign
involved sending messages with the subject line privacy alert purporting to
originate from a well-known email service, informing the user that their account has been accessed from an unrecognized device in a different country. because
the targeted individuals are often professionals who have access to sensitive
information, this can be an effective way to entice users to click a change
password link that actually leads to a webpage under the attacker s control. typically, the link will lead to a domain name that is similar to a legitimate
domain name used by the service in an effort to fool the user into thinking the
message is legitimate. figure 2 lists some examples. if the attack is successful, strontium uses the captured credentials to access
the victim s email account to identify additional targets and for additional
analysis and attacks. even if the recipient doesn t enter their login credentials microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 5 into the malicious webpage, the act of clicking the link can provide strontium
with valuable information. in addition to providing strontium with the
recipient s ip address, clicking the link transmits a user-agent string to the web
server that typically includes details about the recipient s browser and operating
system versions, and sometimes includes information about the browser add-
ons the recipient is using. this can provide strontium with insight into what
software is deployed in the organization, and possibly help it plan future drive-
by download activities. figure 3. javascript is used to collect information about the visitor s browser for drive-by download attacks attacking the target the ultimate goal of the reconnaissance phase is to compile a list of high-value
individuals who have information or access that strontium wants. with this list
at hand, the group moves to the next phase of operations: installing malware on the high-value targets computers, and thereby gaining access to the
institution s network. strontium primarily uses email to deliver malware to targeted individuals,
although some researchers have reported delivery through social networking
channels as well. typical messages, such as the one shown in figure 4, are tied
to current events: an upcoming conference, for example, or a real world news
event in which the recipient might be interested. strontium s email senders
are usually associated with well-known email providers, and use plausible-
seeming names and titles that are designed to give the messages credibility.
depending on the specific attack used, the message typically includes a link for additional information, which will launch a drive-by download or social
engineering attack when clicked. other messages include malicious attachments
instead of links, typically a document file containing an exploit. please be advised that the spanish army personnel and a large number of the
spanish guardia civil officers
currently deployed in the central african republic (car) as part of the
european eufor rca mission will return
to spain in early march as the mission draws to a close. little is known about how and what information strontium gathers to tailor its
attacks to specific high-value individuals. as discussed earlier, the user-agent
and potential fingerprinting information gathered from phishing victims may
play a part in planning the individual attacks by giving the group insight into
what software may be in widespread use within the institution. in general, microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 7 strontium can take advantage of a variety of attacks that span general tactics
and cover a wide range of technologies, including zero-day exploits. zero-day exploits exploits that target vulnerabilities for which the affected
software vendor has not yet released a security update form a significant part
of strontium s arsenal. it is not yet clear whether the group researches
vulnerabilities and develops the exploits themselves, or purchases them on the
black market. microsoft researchers have observed strontium moving swiftly to take zero-day exploits
form a significant
part of
strontium s
arsenal. advantage of newly disclosed vulnerabilities; notably, the group
deployed a number of zero-day exploits disclosed in a july 2015
leak of information from the security company hacking team. in
other cases, strontium deployed exploits within days of a
vendor releasing a security update that addressed the
associated vulnerability, relying on the fact that not everyone
installs security updates immediately after they are published. the exploits used by strontium include a wide range of products from multiple vendors, including adobe flash player, the oracle java
runtime environment (jre), microsoft word and internet explorer, and some
components of the windows kernel. figure 5 lists some of the exploits used by
strontium in recent campaigns, including a number of zero-day exploits
(shaded). all of the vulnerabilities listed in figure 5 were quickly addressed by
security updates as part of the vendors rapid response processes. (see guidance on page 16 for information about how organizations can use up-to-
date software to defend against targeted attacks.) figure 5. some of the exploits used by strontium in attack campaigns in 2014 and 2015 in addition to using zero-day exploits, strontium also makes use of exploits
that target older vulnerabilities for which security updates have been available
for a long time. microsoft believes that in some cases, the group learns during
the reconnaissance phase that the targeted institution may be exposed to risks
by running older or out-of-support platforms and software, by not testing and
applying security updates quickly, or by not taking advantage of the latest
mitigations and defense mechanisms shipped with more recent product
versions and then acts accordingly. in a development observed in october 2015, the shellcode that executes after a
successful memory corruption exploit displayed a number of characteristics that
researchers had not observed from the malware previously: api resolution: ror 0x0d hashing, resolution made just before using the api payloads in memory remote payloads in addition to relying on exploits, strontium also uses social engineering to
trick victims into installing malware. since march of 2015, for example, microsoft
has observed strontium successfully compromising mozilla firefox users by
convincing them to install a malicious browser add-on based on a publicly
available module ( bootstrapped addon social engineering code execution )
developed for the metasploit security testing framework. establishing control after gaining administrative privileges on the computer through an exploit or
social engineering, strontium uses a dropper to deploy a backdoor
component, coreshell, which eventually downloads other modules.
(microsoft products sometimes detect the primary components as variants in
the win32/foosace family, although the group has used other malware in the
past.) the dll backdoor is installed via execution of rundll32 with an export
named init or initw. the dropper deletes itself after execution, while the dll
backdoor and any additional components are typically copied under the
following folders: the dropper also writes the command and control (c&c) configuration
information to the registry or an encrypted file. this strategy complicates
forensic discovery of the attacker s infrastructure if the backdoor dll is
discovered, because the configuration information must be located separately. 10 strontium: a profile of a persistent and motivated adversary strontium ensures that its backdoor will run every time the computer starts by
creating autostart extensibility point (asep) registry entries and shortcuts, which
differ depending on what the attacker has chosen for the victim and which
backdoor variant is used. (see advanced malware cleaning techniques for the
it professional on page 96 of microsoft security intelligence report, volume 11
(january june 2011), available from the microsoft download center, for
guidance on using sysinternals tools to monitor aseps for signs of malware
infection.) the most common aseps used by strontium for its malware
include the following: the strontium backdoor is composed of several pieces with different
functions. the attacker can deploy a large set of tools to perform tasks including
key logging, email address and file harvesting, information gathering about the
local computer, and remote communication with c&c servers. strontium also
uses a component that is designed to infect connected usb storage devices, so
that information can be captured from air-gapped computers that are not on microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 11 the network when a user transfers the usb device to the air-gapped computer
and then back to the network again. figure 9. different types of strontium components and filenames used during recently observed incidents the strontium group also appears to be active on non-windows systems.
microsoft has seen solid indicators that strontium used malicious backdoors
to take control of proxy servers, mail servers, and other systems
running the linux operating system. microsoft also observed the
group using domains that seem to be customized for different
operating systems, including and . although microsoft does not generally
study attacks on non-windows systems, a multiplatform attack
strategy is very much in line with what has been observed about
strontium in general that they have capabilities that cover a the strontium
group also appears
to be active on
non-windows
systems. wide range of technologies and any incident response against this adversary
should take both windows and non-windows computers into consideration. 12 strontium: a profile of a persistent and motivated adversary the strontium backdoor can communicate over different network protocols,
including http, smtp, and pop3. typically, the backdoor tests its connectivity
with a series of http post requests to legitimate websites, and then establishes
communication with its c&c servers. the domains
strontium uses for its c&c servers are typically designed
to avoid attracting attention if administrators notice them
when reviewing network traffic, such as and , suggestive of software update and
malware reputation services. in recent incidents during 2015, microsoft observed
strontium using a tunnel component designed to provide
a remote encrypted interactive shell to a pre-configured ip address using proxy
software on the victim s computer, such as the popular open-source squid
proxy. the tunneling module, which is customized for different targets, is slightly
larger than 1 mb and is statically linked with an openssl library. based on debug
information left in some samples, some researchers have reported that the
name of the component may be xaps objective or xtunnel. 4 the c&c
server for this tunnel could be either hardcoded in the binary or passed as a
command-line parameter at startup. the domains
strontium uses
are designed to
avoid attracting
attention. figure 10. "xaps" in the strontium tunnel module binary samples for this component include the items in the following table: 4 gastbeitrag, digital attack on german parliament: investigative report on the hack of the left party
infrastructure in bundestag, , june 19, 2015, https:// /2015/digital-attack-on-
german-parliament-investigative-report-on-the-hack-of-the-left-party-infrastructure-in-bundestag/. microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 13 after gaining a foothold on one computer, strontium attempts to move
laterally through the organization by compromising additional computers to
gain access to more data and high-value targets. strontium uses publicly
available tools such as winexe (a remote command-line execution tool) and
mimikatz (a windows credential gathering tool) to move between computers via
methods such as pass the hash (pth). in recent incidents microsoft observed
strontium using a customized version of mimikatz that was recompiled with a
privilege escalation exploit (cve-2015-1701, addressed by security bulletin
ms15-051) and stored captured credential information in a dedicated file, . figure 12. a customized version of mimikatz storing passwords in the file strontium has displayed an advanced understanding of military and classified
government networks, and uses a component that is designed to extract
information from air-gapped computers. this module registers a device callback via registerdevicenotification5 and receives a notification every time a usb
mass storage device is inserted into a compromised computer. depending on
the variant deployed, the backdoor may simply harvest the entire contents of
the usb device and save it on the local computer for later extraction, or it may
also use autorun malware to transfer itself to the device so that it can attempt to
compromise any other computers it is later inserted into, including air-gapped
computers.6 some strontium victims have reported the presence of computers running
kali linux on their networks. kali linux is a linux distribution that combines a
variety of tools for the purpose of penetration testing and security assessment. it
contains tools for password attacks, sniffing & spoofing, maintaining access,
hardware hacking, reverse engineering, information gathering, vulnerability
analysis, wireless attacks, web application attacks, stress testing, and forensic and 6 changes to the way the autorun feature works make it more difficult for this technique to succeed in recent
versions of windows. see - for more information. microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 15 exploitation analysis. the tool lists within each category are quite extensive and
the distribution is actively maintained, so that strontium can always take
advantage of the latest open-source tools. strontium does not deploy this
linux distribution on an existing computer that belongs to the targeted
institution; rather, it uses a vpn connection to join one of its own kali linux
computers to the victim s network, possibly using the tunnel component that
was previously deployed. this approach allows strontium to only ephemerally
expose its toolset to the victim s network. guidance strontium is a very challenging adversary for a targeted institution to defend
against: it possesses a broad range of technical exploitation capabilities,
significant access to resources such as previously undiscovered zero-day
exploits, and the determination to keep up an attack for months or years until it
succeeds. nevertheless, there are steps an organization can take to significantly
reduce its attack surface and decrease the probability of a successful
compromise. strontium is a
challenging
adversary for a
targeted institution
to defend against. stay up-to-date on vendor security updates and deploy them quickly after they are released. all of the exploits discussed
in this section have been addressed by security updates from
microsoft and other vendors. strontium depends heavily on
the presence of out-of-date software installations inside target
institutions, so keeping software up-to-date denies the group
the use of some of its most effective tools. take advantage of the mitigations built into your software. recent versions of windows and other software include critical mitigations that render many
of strontium s exploits ineffective when deployed. figure 5 on page 8 lists
a number of zero-day exploits that strontium has used in recent
campaigns. most of these exploits will fail if tried on a computer running the
latest versions of windows and office, even without security updates that
address the vulnerabilities: the strontium exploits that target cve-2015-1641 and cve-2015- 2424, which affect microsoft word and have been addressed by security bulletins ms15-033 and ms15-070 respectively, depend on static hard- coded rop chains that fail when address space layout randomization 16 strontium: a profile of a persistent and motivated adversary player addressed by adobe security bulletin apsb15-06, fails in internet explorer running on an up-to-date installation of windows 8.1 or windows 10 because of control flow guard, a mitigation introduced in a windows 8.1 security update in november 2014. control flow guard mitigates virtual function hijacking attempts such as the one involving enforce segregation of privileges on user accounts and apply all possible safety measures to protect admin accounts from being compromised;
strontium relies on pass-the-hash techniques and elevation of privileges
to successfully move laterally across networks. see mitigating pass-the-
hash (pth) attacks and other credential theft, version 2, available at the
microsoft download center, for more information. in enterprise environments in which isolated computer networks (air-
gapped) and internet connected networks co-exist, enforce strong policies
to prevent sharing and usage of removable media across the air gap. conduct enterprise software security awareness training, and build awareness about malware infection prevention. strontium heavily relies
on social engineering to entice individual targets into clicking links to
malware. security training can raise awareness around this attack vector. institute multi-factor authentication. as strontium extensively uses
credential-stealing spear phishing attacks, multi-factor authentication can
be an effective tool to prevent unauthorized access even if credentials are
stolen. microsoft security intelligence report, volume 19, january june 2015 19 prepare your network to be forensically ready, so that you can achieve
containment and recovery if a compromise occurs. a forensically ready
network that records authentications, password changes, and other
significant network events can help to quickly identify affected systems. keep personnel and personal data private. strontium uses open-source
intelligence (osint) to obtain its initial lists of victims, which might include
things like name and email address, but can expand into employment
information and other items of interest. these are all pieces of information
strontium can use to devise a realistic attack. the more information
strontium has available, the better they can target you. make sure your
email is kept confidential and privacy settings on social media don t disclose
sensitive information publicly. 20 strontium: a profile of a persistent and motivated adversary
