about the threat posed by russian hacking
groups. besides well-known events such as
the attacks against estonia, georgia, and ukraine;
recent headlines have seen russian hacking syndicates
credited with targeting nato officials at conferences,
stealing hundreds of millions from banks, and
successfully penetrating the white house unclassified
computer network. the increase in cyber-exploits is
also accompanied by a much more aggressive russian
foreign policy, which has seen them invade ukraine
and literally seize control of sovereign territory in
crimea. so it should not surprise anyone that just
as nuclear capable russian bombers are increasingly
penetrating foreign airspace, their cyber-warriors
appear to be ramping up their intrusions as well.
but this time, perhaps for the first time, root9b has
managed to find where they were hiding and identified
effective defenses against their intended attacks. this is
what happened in late april and early may of this year. our firm of cybersecurity experts, staffed by
veterans from the united states department of
defense, identified suspicious activity within one
of our client s networks; a threat which on closer
inspection bore the unique signature of a group of
russian hackers well-known in the cyber-security 2 industry. as cyber threat analysts continued to
follow the indicators, they uncovered a global
attack in the making, and took steps to protect not
only our clients, but other identified victims as well. sofacy, sednit, sourface, apt-28, and a host of other
names are all used to describe this particularly prolific
and superbly talented group of russian hackers, which
has strongly suspected ties to russian intelligence
services. in the last year alone russian hackers have
reportedly stolen up to 900 million dollars from banks
around the world. over the past three to five years
they have built the largest botnets ever discovered, and
stolen the log-in and password credentials to literally apt-28 may 10, 2015 root9b: the threat defiance report tens of millions of online accounts. well known for
their ability to infiltrate and remain undiscovered
in networks for long periods of time, they may be
the most successful group of hackers in the world.
whereas previous attacks have been attributed and
analyzed only after they have run their course, this
was the first and only known sofacy attack to be
discovered, identified, and reported all before it
could even begin! the analysts and tools that enabled
this to happen are unique and proprietary. this report
documents the first ever operation to use threat
intelligence and adversary tactics to discover and
reveal the prepositioning of sofacy zero-day malware.
this document also
includes the reporting of
previously unknown malware indicators and hashes. the threat
russian president vladimir putin recently described
the internet as an invention of the cia. but the
group most widely associated with his government
dominates the world of industrial scale hacking. first
discovered circa 2007 using security vulnerabilities in
microsoft windows, sofacy has gone on to develop and
launch truly enormous attacks exploiting numerous
applications including adobe s acrobat, microsoft
excel, and others. some attacks have focused on the
sorts of targets that seem likely to be of interest to
russian intelligence services. nato, defense industry
corporations, and government domains of states
opposed to russia on various issues have all been, at
times, victims of sofacy. at other times large banks
and private corporations have been hit hard by sofacy
exploits, at a cost of hundreds of millions to the victims.
sofacy s choice of targets has historically been an
interesting mixture that has fueled an ongoing
debate over whether the group is criminal in
nature, or actually an agent of a nation-state. most
cybersecurity analysts have concluded that the group s
affiliation with the russian government is undeniable.
but there are detractors. those who argue loudest
against such assertions cite sofacy s prolific criminal
profit as evidence that they are most likely not
agents of the federal security service (fsb); while
others suppose that the crimes committed bearing 3 sofacy s unique signatures is a perfect cover behind
which the russian government prefers to remain.
the defenders
started in 2012 and staffed almost entirely by former
united states department of defense civilians and
military cyber-warriors, root9b brings a unique
base of knowledge and experience to the task of
securing corporate networks. this comes at a time
when the demand for services is stronger than ever
and increasing daily. calling on years of collective
experience in positions that placed their analysts at
the tip of the cyber-spear, root9b has developed a
unique approach to the problem of cyber-defense.
understanding that the present tools are failing at
an alarming rate, they have developed methods and
software applications which seek to augment, rather
than replace, existing cyber-security defenses. the
problem is not that traditional methods do not
work. it is that hackers are becoming increasingly
sophisticated and able to generate new threats faster
than ever before. standard network security systems
typically fail against what are known as zero-day
threats. zero-day is a term that refers to a new kind
of hacking exploit that has never been seen before,
and is therefore not detected by standard virus and
intrusion detection software. typically, such threats
take an alarmingly long time to detect and eliminate,
often more than a year. they were once relatively rare,
because it takes a high degree of skill to develop and
exploit them. the production and sale on the black
market has increased exponentially in recent years,
developing into a criminal industry that is placing
online commerce, as well as national security, at
growing risk. in the time between deployment of a
zero-day and its eventual discovery and eradication,
corporations can suffer enormous losses without
even realizing that the threat was ever there. to combat threats, root9b realized that technology is
not the problem. computers don t attack networks.
people do, said root9b. you cannot build a better
system to stop a determined human, you must think
like the attacker and provide manned cyber defense
operations as the new adaptive security posture.
root9b operators and software developers designed apt-28 may 10, 2015 root9b: the threat defiance report and constructed proprietary methods of discovering
and dealing with adversaries. with a network defense
strategy of pursuit and deterrence in mind, root9b
operators conduct active adversary pursuit (hunt)
operations as a tailored solution for cyber security
teams. working in concert with traditional network
defense appliances that currently reside in our client s
proprietary network, root9b s hunt platform delivers
a pro-active defense protection capability to identify,
pursue, and mitigate cyber threats. this approach was
developed by root9b in order to leverage previously
existing security products with client-specific threat
intelligence and proprietary capabilities that can
identify
generate
actionable intelligence, and install solutions with
much greater speed and efficiency. vulnerabilities, sophisticated winning in advance
during the end of april 2015, root9b analysts were
conducting routine security analysis to explore and
discover new and emerging cyber threats. threat
analysts discovered what appeared to be a targeted
spearfishing domain aimed at a financial institution.
the server it was found on raised even more
questions, because although security experts knew
the server as a bad actor, it was generally associated
with malware used in nation state attacks. as analysts
continued their work they discovered several more
pieces of new malware. the malicious code bore
specific signatures that have historically been unique
to only one organization, sofacy. this malware 4 was pointing at a spearfishing domain registered to
impersonate a middle eastern financial institution
and the domain registration details did not match
normal sofacy operational signatures. that said, the
malicious software certainly did. members of root9b s
operations
team conducted hunt operations,
remotely deploying their live memory capability across
the clients proprietary networks to analyze known
techniques that can evade the most efficient security
products on the market. root9b s capability parses live
memory while the system is running and looks for
indicators of advanced tactics such as code injection
or security product bypassing. using a combination
of standard industry tools and proprietary techniques
our analysts began to develop a larger picture of what
was taking place. immediately, root9b identified that
preparations were being made for a larger scale attack
similar to previous sofacy attributed exploits, and
the attack was still in the preparatory stages. to our
analysts, this was a rare opportunity. it is rare enough
to learn of an attack of this potential magnitude in
advance, but to have all of the information necessary
to stop it before it begins is unprecedented, said an
unnamed root9b analyst. evidence of intrusion within client networks pointed
to a specific server, , that had been
previously linked to malicious activity and identified
by other security firms as part of the infrastructure
utilized by the sofacy group. analysts studied the
remaining domains registered on that server, and
initially noted that one in particular, cbiuaebank. apt-28 may 10, 2015 root9b: the threat defiance report com, appeared to be a fake version of ,
the actual domain of the website of commercial
bank international of the united arab emirates.
further analysis lead to even more suspicion, and
those suspicions grew even stronger as they watched
another comparable domain created, cbiuaebn.
com. as analysts passively monitored carbon2u.
com, they observed as the apparent fake domains
they were monitoring migrated to other servers; first
to and later to .
this gave analysts two more suspicious servers to
study, and added considerable data analysis. root9b analysts began to dissect the data at hand to
identify common tactics, techniques, and procedures
used by the adversaries which could provide further
information about the planned hack, including
information about potential attack vectors. as
root9b analyzed increasing amounts of metadata
and associated indicators, they were able to identify
a very unique signature consistently used by someone
involved in setting up the hack. investigating the 5 apparently fictitious list of personas used to create
and register domains, a pattern emerged. due to
the nature of this unique signature, root9b is in the
process of further documenting and reporting to the
proper authorities. the discovery of the hacker s single mistake in
tradecraft was indeed a powerful catalyst, and lead
to the discovery of a treasure trove of new indicators.
the new discoveries included evidence related to past
attempts to launch attacks against many of the same
targets, including the aforementioned commercial
bank international. what the analysts eventually
had was a very detailed view of the specific tactics
employed by this adversary; and a window into a
plan for a hack that was even larger than originally
believed, much larger. where initially they had only
a single fake domain pointed at cbi, now there were
six additional domains, all used to target this single
victim. many of the fake domains appeared to have
been created by several of the same accounts, and open
source analysis indicated that the names listed for the apt-28 may 10, 2015 root9b: the threat defiance report person registering the addresses was clearly fictitious;
probably chosen at random from the internet. the analysts at root9b understand better than anyone
the significance of this analysis. as far as any of them
know, and it stands to reason that they would, there
has never been a case of a large-scale attack utilizing
numerous zero-day exploits that were so thoroughly
mapped in advance before. the analysts who worked
this case now understand that the attackers began
preparations for this campaign in june 2014, a full
eleven months ago. the design of the hack bears
striking similarity to the very exploits that have made
sofacy so feared and respected. at least nine months
of meticulous preparation coupled with one slip of
tradecraft has enabled root9b to inform potential
targets prior to the execution of the strategy. with the exception of , there
are numerous consistencies amongst the tactics
employed by the hackers. the group generates what
are likely fictitious personalities as the owners of each of the fake domains. all of the fictitious
personalities list the same street address. while they
change names and house numbers for them, they all
reside on cloverdale lane in desoto, texas. analysts
noting the similarity did not have to visit the street
to determine that it was unlikely that they each
resided in different homes on the same street. in
fact, even the house numbers changed only slightly
from one domain to the other. in addition to the
links between the addresses, streets, and names, they
found that the registrant phone numbers were also
very closely related. the only differences in registrant
data from one domain to the next involved very slight
modifications to the country codes or by changing the
third digit. this kind of flaw in tradecraft allowed for
further detailed network analysis. further analysis of the street addresses enabled
root9b to correlate the address and personas listed as
registrants via public records, doing so showed that
most of these addresses did not even exist, and the
few addresses confirmed to physically exist did not
have residents with the names listed. this became a 6 key signature of the hackers; a common thread which
unraveled all of sofacy s careful preparation. often
those wanting to generate a free and anonymous email
address will use a false name and address in order to
conceal and preserve their true identity. the information below dictates open source research
on the adversary s creation of domains. as previously
noted, root9b is in the process of further documenting
and reporting probable fictitious personas to the
authorities.
correlating the increasing amounts of information,
root9b analysts have determined that the adversary
responsible for the initial attack in june 2014 was
almost certainly the same, or very closely-related to
the entity responsible for creating at least two of the
domains in april 2015. the same person was ostensibly
responsible for registering the two most recent
domains ( and cbiuaebank.
com). analysts from root9b now believe that the
adversary most likely selected this name through
an internet search, and that these personas, while
possibly real names, are not the true names of those
individuals associated with the preparations for this
attack. root9b analysts have also identified an additional
persona; one that did not appear to directly relate to
this attack against cbi uae bank, but that carried
similar operational tactics to include comparable
street address schemes and the registration of 7 domains closely resembling financial institutions.
by studying the new persona, root9b discovered
they had previously created several domains and
websites, all of which have been flagged as fake
financial institutions by security analysts. also
identified during this analysis, was the prepositioning
of a domain targeting the financial institution b-of- , created in april 2015. this indicates
that bank of america, is among the probable targets. this same individual has registered numerous other
fake domains on many more name servers. one of
these name servers, , contains
several other international financial institutions. one
of those domains, t-d- , was
updated	on	23	march	2015,	and	appears	to	be	targeting
toronto dominion (td) canada trust. among the
apparent targets of other domains similarly created
or updated in 2015 are: the united nations, united
nations children s fund, united bank for africa,
regions bank, and possibly commerzbank. intelligence. the targets results
while root9b s discovery began with servicing
their own customers, their analysis has revealed an
adversary pattern that has enabled the identification
of previously unknown target vectors. as root9b
analysts continued to peel back the layers, it became
more apparent, that this attack was likely associated
with russian
included
multiple major financial institutions, as well as the
international government domain. in addition to
identifying targets, root9b analysts also discovered
indicators of malware, the analysis of which revealed
several zero-day threats and their corresponding hashes. each new discovery revealed more
information, enabling a more complete picture to
emerge. root9b discovered and analyzed numerous
other domains being staged or recently created for
the malicious cyber operation. also discovered was a
fatal flaw in the hackers tradecraft that lead to a major
breakthrough. research based on the adversary s flaw
in tactics showed that there was a strong likelihood of
two distinct subgroups, each of which utilized unique apt-28 may 10, 2015 root9b: the threat defiance report according to their conclusions, root9b analysts expect
that spear-phishing attacks will begin in the near
future, or may have already commenced. as root9b
continues to work with authorities it is recommended
that the aforementioned financial institutions take
caution examining any and all correspondence. in
addition, it is recommended that networks begin
blocking the following hashes and communications
with the identified command and control (c2)
server:
methods of cover for their activity. each of the two
groups also had a unique theme to their target sets.
the first seemed to focus on military, diplomatic,
and media targets, and relied on the cover of proxies
and private domain registrations. as documented
earlier, the other group used deliberately falsified
personalities, all of which claimed to be american
citizens, and focused on financial and banking targets.
understanding the scope of the newly staged malicious
operations, root9b also tipped the information to the
appropriate international and domestic government
authorities. while the continued vector of the attack remains
unclear, root9b assesses that it will most likely be a
spear-phishing campaign. this attack vector will likely
use a well-crafted email containing either a malicious
file or web hyperlink to what recipients believe is the
actual website; but is instead a fake landing page.
in typical attacks of this nature, once users navigate
to the link, visitors are prompted to supply account
credentials and personal information under the false
assumption that they are communicating with their
bank via a secure link. however, it is possible, that the
sofacy group could utilize this server as a vector to
deliver malicious code to the banking victims in an
attempt to obtain access to the network. as of october
2014, the symantec corporation had reported an
increased use of spear-phishing emails containing
malware
targeted against financial
institutions. 