
operation pawn storm refers to economic
and political espionage attacks instigated by
a group of threat actors primarily targeting
military, embassy, and defense contractor
personnel from the united states and its
allies. opposing factions to and dissidents of
the russian government, international media,
and even the national security department
of a u.s. ally were also targeted. the threat
actors used three attack vectors spear-
phishing emails with malicious attachments,
an advanced network of phishing websites,
and exploits injected into legitimate polish
websites. among the targets of the advanced
phishing attacks were academi, a defense
contractor formerly known as blackwater, saic, and the organization for security
and co-operation in europe (osce).
as discussed in this research paper, the
attackers used a simple but clever javascript
trick to target microsoft outlook web access (owa) users from the previously
mentioned organizations. the owa phishing
attacks seemed effective and so could be
particularly dangerous to any organization
that allows employees to use owa. an in-depth look at six multistage attacks
revealed one thing in common the use of
sednit/sofacy malware [1], [2]. the use
of such multistage downloaders provided
attackers additional protection against
detection. we believe the threat actors aimed
to confuse their targets it administrators
by making it hard for them to string attack
components together, thus evading detection. this research paper details when certain
attacks occurred, what tools were used in
attempts to get in to target networks, and
target profiles to form a general picture of
operation pawn storm. trend micro | operation pawn storm ties that bind the operation pawn
storm attacks together attack timeline sednit malware are mostly backdoors [3], [4]
and information stealers [5] that log affected
users keystrokes, steal system information,
and send stolen information to remote
command-and-control (c&c) servers. analyses of the sednit infectors that arrived
as email attachments in the attacks featured
in this paper revealed six distinct chains [see
diagram on page 3]. the investigation focused on a group of
attacks that has been dubbed operation
pawn storm [6] due to the attackers use of
two or more connected tools/tactics to attack
a specific target similar to the chess strategy
it was named after. this paper illustrates how
the pawn storm attacks were carried out with
the aid of five spear-phishing emails, which
used contextually relevant subjects to get
specific targets from different countries to
open weaponized attachments designed to
compromise their systems. timeline of spear-phishing emails sent to specific targets the attackers sent emails to potential victims,
including military, embassy, and defense
contractor personnel. the following emails
were among those that were found related to
this operation: an email sent to a potential victim from the ministry of defense in france
had an exploit for cve-2010-3333
[7] disguised as a document named international . trend micro
received a sample of this on october
17, 2011 and has been detecting it as
troj_artief.ap [8] since then. an email sent to a potential victim
working from the vatican embassy
in iraq used reports of a bombing
incident [9] that occurred on january
9, 2012 as social engineering lure. sample email sent to recipients from the vatican embassy in iraq 2013 to military officials from several
countries used the then-upcoming asia-pacific economic cooperation
(apec) indonesia 2013 conference
as bait. the email had two microsoft
excel file attachments named apec media list 2013 , which exploited cve-2012-0158, and apec media list 2013 , which was nonmalicious. sample email sent to military officials from pakistan using the homeland security summit middle east conference as bait an email sent to polish government
employees [12] on august 11, 2014
had a mime html (.mht) file
attachment named , which
exploited cve-2012-0158. sample email sent to military officials across
countries using the apec indonesia 2013 conference as bait an email sent to pakistani military officials on january 23, 2014 used the homeland security summit middle
east [11] conference as bait. it had a
word file attachment named details. attack details all of the observed operation pawn storm
attacks comprised several stages. each
attack had at least two phases: in phase 1, opening the email
attachment displays a decoy
document while the exploit runs in
the background. the exploit drops in phase 2, the downloader
component communicates with a c&c
server and downloads a dropper that
ultimately installs a keylogger. after capturing information from infected
systems, the keylogger sends data
back to the c&c server. phases 1 and 2 in an operation pawn storm attack we only managed to collect latter-
stage payloads for two out of the six
aforementioned attacks. the c&c servers
tied to the other four attacks refused to serve
the rest of the files to complete the attack
chains. multistage attacks are a double-edged sword.
if one link in the attack chain, aside from
the end node, is detected and removed in
the initial infection stage, the entire attack
fails. on the other hand, having several
links in the attack chain makes detecting the
final component more difficult. tracing the
previous and next links is also difficult when
any of the components is inspected on its
own outside the attack chain. although some of the c&c servers were still
alive at the time of investigation, they did not
respond to our infected systems. repeated
attempts to trick the c&c servers into serving
the next files in the incomplete attack chains
failed. the attacks they were tied to could be
time sensitive and it is possible that they no
longer hosted the files for succeeding stages. attack evolution even though the filenames used for different
components remained fairly consistent from
2010 to the present, earlier attacks were
more elaborate and complex compared with
those seen this year. the 2014 attacks we
have seen were more streamlined. although variations in past and current
attack chains exist, both are still being
used by threat actors to date to ensure one thing detection evasion. the following table
compares and contrasts the six operation
pawn storm attacks in greater detail. the threat actors behind operation pawn
storm spread sednit malware via exploits
on legitimate polish websites. in september
2014, for instance, the power exchange
website in poland, www . irgit . pl, was
compromised. the attackers rigged it with an
iframe that pointed to http :// defenceiq .
us / 2rkyz _ bgxpm and http :// api . akmicdn .
com / gpw ? key = 1072726955. the first link
led to an exploit kit [14] that was responsible
for spreading sednit malware. the
eset paper did not mention that an earlier
incident occurred in mid-july 2014 wherein
a malicious iframe pointing to yovtube . co
was injected into polish government
websites though. and that the same domain,
defenceiq . us, was used against japanese
targets in september 2014. it is remarkable that a mass infection
methodology was used by the pawn storm
actors even though the actual sednit
samples were only served to particular
targets. actual exploitation was only triggered
when certain criteria that had to do with os,
language settings, time zone, and installed
software were met. next-level phishing targets the attackers used specially crafted emails
to redirect targets to any of several phishing
websites with domain names that were very
similar to those of well-known conferences
and media outfits. these websites did not
host malicious content but visiting them
did lead to the automatic execution of a
nonmalicious javascript. links to these fake
websites were then embedded in spear-
phishing emails and sent to selected targets. opening such an email and clicking the
link in owa redirected victims to legitimate
websites. the javascript made it appear that
the victims owa sessions ended while at the same time, tricked them into reentering
their credentials. to do this, the attackers
redirected victims to fake owa log-in pages
by setting their browsers open windows
property. the victims credentials thus ended
up in the attackers hands. note that two special conditions need to
be met for the attacks to succeed victims
should use owa and click the embedded
links via the web portal s preview pane. the
attacks worked on any popular browser such
as firefox , safari , chrome , and internet
explorer . no vulnerabilities need to be
exploited for the javascript to work. because many companies allow employees
to use webmail services to access their
mailboxes while on business travel or at
home, these attacks are likely to succeed.
once they do, attackers can gain access to
compromised mailboxes that they can then
use to gain a foothold in target networks. throughout the course of investigation,
several targets have been identified,
including: academi, formerly blackwater (united states) broadcasting companies in various countries military attach s from various countries ministry of defense (france) ministry of defense (hungary) multinational company based in germany osce (austria) pakistani military officials polish government employees 11 trend micro | operation pawn storm saic (united states) u.s. department of state vatican embassy (iraq) the following case studies reveal more in-
depth details on four specific attacks. case 1: ministry of defense,
hungary malicious conference domain: eurosatory2014 . com real conference domain: eurosatory . com phished owa domain: mail . hm . qov . hu real owa domain: the attackers created a domain that was
very similar to eurosatory . com [15], a website
for an international land and air-land defense
and security exhibition. they then sent emails
with the link, http :// eurosatory2014 . com, to
selected employees of the target defense
ministry who might actually have been
expecting to hear from the conference staff
members. clicking the link embedded in the email
via the owa preview pane opens the real
conference website in a new tab. the victims owa session in the other tab, meanwhile,
is redirected to a phished log-in page that
makes it look like the session has ended. real eurosatory 2014 conference website opens in a new tab after clicking the link in a spear-phishing email viewed in owa closed owa session page (fake) victims will
see, forcing them to reenter their credentials in reality, the victims owa session did not
end. the previously mentioned javascript
just redirected them to a fake owa log-
in page that looks just like the ministry of
defense in hungary s real one. apart from eurosatory 2014, other
conferences were also used to target
employees of the ministry of defense in
hungary as shown in the following table. this attack targeted osce employees in
austria. although the attackers used similar
tactics, they did not spoof a conference
website. they instead used a fake version of
the news website, news . vice . com. even though osce provides better security
for webmail users compared with the other
targets via one-time session token use during
log-in, attackers can still steal highly sensitive
data from victims by hijacking a single
session. this attack targeting saic was very similar
to the first case. the attackers spoofed
the website of the future forces 2014 conference to trick email recipients into
handing over their webmail credentials. his attack targeted the employees of u.s.
defense contractor, academi, using the
same phishing tactics as in the second case. comparison of the legitimate (top) and spoofed (bottom) owa log-in pages of academi apart from the four specific cases presented
above, evidence pointing to a fake owa
server for a multinational company based in
germany was also discovered. the threat
actors registered a domain that looked
very similar to the target s real domain and
purchased a secure sockets layer (ssl)
certificate for the fake domain as part of
preparations for a targeted attack. trend
micro was able to warn the target early on,
which helped thwart the threat. 14 trend micro | operation pawn storm other webmail services webmail services such as gmail , live mail,
yahoo! , hushmail, and yandex. owa users are not the only ones at risk
though, as the threat actors behind operation
pawn storm also targeted users of free sample gmail, live mail, hushmail, and yandex account phishing websites we leaked specific credentials to the threat
actors in a couple of cases to see if the
fake webmail service log-in pages were
indeed intended for attack use. within
minutes of leaking the test credentials,
unauthorized log-ins were recorded. the
first log-in was usually an automated log-
in check from the same ip address as the
phishing website s owner. the succeeding
log-ins were made from the ip addresses, (latvia) and (united states), via internet message access
protocol (imap). no other forms of abuse
such as sending spam via the compromised
accounts were witnessed. this showed that
the attackers were indeed trying to obtain
sensitive data from their targets instead
of using their accounts for fraud and other
financially motivated scams. 15 trend micro | operation pawn storm conclusion operation pawn storm used next-level
spear-phishing tactics to obtain the email
credentials of primarily military, embassy,
and defense contractor personnel from the
united states and its allies. the threat actors
used a mix of spear-phishing emails and
specially crafted webmail service phishing
websites to gain access to victims inboxes in
hopes of getting better footholds inside target
organizations. so as not to raise suspicion,
the attackers used well-known events and
conferences as social engineering bait. they
have been quite persistent as well, as we
have seen evidence that attacks have been
going on since 2007. apart from effective phishing tactics, the
threat actors used a combination of proven
targeted attack staples to compromise
systems and get in to target networks exploits and data-stealing malware. sednit
variants particularly proved useful, as
these allowed the threat actors to steal all
manners of sensitive information from the
victims computers while effectively evading
detection. trend micro has notified the targets that have
been identified in this paper. individuals and
their respective organizations, meanwhile,
should use solutions that can help protect
against the various attack vectors that the
threat actors behind operation pawn storm
used. messaging security solutions such as trend
micro interscan messaging security
[16] and the scanmail suite for microsoft
exchange [17] can send suspicious email
attachments to a sandbox for analysis, thus
protecting recipients from threats. other
products such as officescan [18] for
endpoints and interscan web security virtual
appliance [19] for gateways can also block
user access to known phishing websites. for overall protection against targeted
attacks, trend micro deep discovery
[20] can help protect potential targets by
sandboxing and analyzing suspicious
attachments to identify phishing emails via
email inspector. via 360-degree monitoring
of network traffic to get networkwide
visibility and intelligence, deep discovery
allows users to detect and respond to
targeted attacks and advanced threats.
it also monitors all ports and more than
80 protocols, giving users the broadest
protection available. even more, specialized
detection engines and custom sandboxing
help identify and analyze malware, c&c
communications, and evasive attacker
activities that are invisible to standard
security solutions. along with in-depth threat
intelligence, it allows for rapid response
and automatic sharing with other security
products to create real-time custom defense
against attacks.
