pinpointing
targets: security
reimagined exploiting web analytics
to ensnare victims
november 20152
fireeye threat intelligence
jonathan wrolstad
barry vengerik3
1 kaspersky labs, symantec and isight partners have reported on campaigns similar, and possibly
related to, the activity we describe in this report.
we have identified suspected nation-state sponsored cyber actors
engaged in a large-scale reconnaissance effort. this effort uses web
analytics the technologies to collect, analyze, and report data from
the web on compromised websites to passively collect information
from website visitors.1 the individuals behind this activity have
amassed vast amounts of information on web traffic and visitors
to over 100 websites sites that the threat actors have selectively
compromised to gain access to their collective audience.
web analytics is used every day in much the same way by advertisers,
marketers and retailers for insight into the most effective ways to
reach their customers and target audiences. this paper explores the
dark side of web analytics by demonstrating how the same tools and
methods that fuel effective content delivery and e-commerce can
potentially allow malicious actors to identify and target victims with
pinpoint precision.
the individuals behind this activity have
amassed vast amounts of information on
web traffc and visitors to more than 100
websites sites that the threat actors have
selectively compromised to gain access to
their collective audience.
introduction
over
the
past
year,4
key findings
threat actors use web
analytics and open source
tools to collect information
about desired victims and
their computers to track,
profile, and possibly infect
them with targeted malware.
the perpetrators alter
specific websites to redirect
visitors to a profiling script
we call witchcoven.
this script collects detailed
information about the user s
computer and installs a
persistent tracking tool,
called a supercookie, which
becomes part of a unique
"browser fingerprint" that
can identify the user s
computer moving forward.
we believe the actors
analyze the collected data
to identify unique users and
pair them with information
about their computer
to later deploy exploits
tailored to their particular
software and computer
configuration.
the operation is most
likely the work of threat
actors aligned with a
government based on
the extensive collection
of data, the culprits operational restraint, and
our assessment of their
probable targets.
we accept that organizations routinely track our online
activity. companies monitor our clicks to see what links we
are drawn to and how much time we spend on a given page.
marketers track our demographic information to better
understand us as customers. advertising firms generate
revenue through referrals as we start our journey on one
website and click a sponsored link to another. shopping sites
use cookies so that the shirt we viewed on a shopping website
weeks ago shows up in an advertisement on our favorite
news website. organizations also learn about our computer
systems. scripts working in the background identify the type
of browser, operating system or mobile device we are using
so that the website displays properly. however, few of us are
aware that cyber threat actors may be using those same tools
to identify and target their next victims.
every day, each of us visits
the web and navigates to our
favorite sites.5
the operation
beginning last year, we identified cyber actors integrating free, publicly available tools with custom scripts to monitor the
online activities of internet users without their
knowledge,2 just as corporations track the online
activity of web users around the world. we
believe these cyber threat actors are building
profiles of potential victims and learning about
the vulnerabilities in users computers. these very
same technologies that marketing firms use to
track their clients and ensure their websites work
on different types of web browsers can help cyber
threat actors better identify their victims and
tailor future infection attempts.
the cyber threat actors start by compromising
large numbers of legitimate websites. the
websites are not randomly chosen targets of
opportunity, but specifically selected as part of
a tactic called a strategic web compromise.3 the
attackers then modify the underlying html
code on the website s home page (and often
several subpages). this modification silently
redirects visitors to a second website that has
also been compromised to host a profiling script
that we call witchcoven. witchcoven
executes in the background without the user s
knowledge, capturing the visitor s computer and
browser configuration (see figure 1 for more
detail) and placing a highly persistent tracking
cookie (a supercookie ) on their computer. in all,
we identified over 100 compromised websites
redirecting visitors to more than a dozen
witchcoven profiling servers.
2 we detected a component of the process the witchcoven profiling script discussed later in the report.
3 a strategic web compromise (swc), also known as a watering hole attack, is a method of passively ensnaring victims as opposed to conducting an active attack such as a spear-phishing campaign. in
an swc, threat actors place exploit code on legitimate websites they anticipate their desired victims will visit as part of their normal online activity. if a targeted user travels to the compromised
website with a vulnerable computer, malware can be installed on their machine.
4 technical details on the witchcoven profiling script are available in the appendix.
5 6 http:// /
when an unsuspecting user visits any of the
over 100 compromised websites, a small piece
of inserted code embedded in the site s html
and invisible to casual visitors quietly redirects
the user s browser to a second compromised
website without the user s knowledge. this
second website hosts the witchcoven
script,4 which uses profiling techniques to collect
technical information on the user s computer.
as of early november 2015, we identified a
total of 14 websites hosting the witchcoven
profiling script.
the script provides the perpetrators with data
on certain applications installed on the user s
computer. witchcoven uses a number
of open source web tools to retrieve this
information such as the software version. these
web tools are freely available, and website
designers commonly use these (or similar) tools
to enhance a users browsing experience. for
example, a site may routinely collect information
about the type and version of visitors web
browsers to ensure that the site content displays
correctly for as many visitors as possible.
we believe these cyber threat
actors are building profles of
potential victims and learning
about the vulnerabilities in
users computers.
the following are
examples of some of the
web tools embedded
in the witchcoven
code and the data they
collect:
the detect office module from the
browser exploitation
framework,5 an open
source penetration
testing tool, determines
the microsoft office
version on a computer
by testing the browser s
response to various
activex objects.
plugindetect6 is a
javascript-based web
tool to detect the type
and version of various
web-browser plugins,
such as java, flash,
reader, and shockwave.6
legitimate but compromised websites
contain a script redirecting visitors to
another website
the witchcoven script profiles
the computer, places a supercookie,
and reads the browser fingerprint
the threat actors collect the data from the
witchcoven script and browser fingerprint
and have several options for follow-on activity
a person browsing the web visits one
of the more than 100 websites with malicious
code placed there by the threat actors
1 2 3 4
figure 1 strategic web compromise redirecting to witchcoven profiling script
witchcoven in action profiling
computers and tracking users7
in addition to collecting data about installed applications, browser plugins
and their versions, the witchcoven script uses another open source tool
known as evercookie . evercookie is designed to create extremely persistent
cookies on a user s computer by:
creating cookies
in multiple storage
locations on the
computer
recreating deleted
cookies, as long
as any one cookie
remains intact on the
computer
attempting
to propagate
evercookies between
browsers on the same
computer
for these reasons, evercookies may be referred
to as supercookies (because they use a broad
range of storage mechanisms) or zombie cookies (because they may be recreated after deletion).
in short, the evercookie provides a way to
consistently identify and track a specific website
visitor and is nearly impossible for the average
user to remove. the evercookie and the other data
gathered by the witchcoven script are sent
back to the compromised web server using an
http post request.
7 a website often uses http
cookies to track a visitor s
actions on that site. for
example, a news website
might track the user s regional
preference and an e-commerce
site might track items in a
visitor s shopping cart while
they continue to browse other
goods. normal http cookies
are used by a single website
and typically enhance a user s
experience on the web.
third-party cookies are http
cookies that can be set and
read by third-party providers
(such as ad companies or
analytics services) that place
content on other websites.
because these third-party
providers host content across
multiple websites, their
cookies can track users across
those sites. a provider who
hosts content on a sports site
and a shopping site can tell
if the same user visits both
sites based on data (such as
unique identifier) within the
third-party cookie. over time,
by noting the types of sites the
user visits, these companies
could build a demographic
profile of the user (age,
income, geographical
location, interests), even
if the user s identity is not
known. while these cookies
are not inherently malicious,
some users view them as
a privacy concern.
both regular cookies and
third-party cookies are
typically stored in the user s
web browser; modern
browsers can be configured
to periodically delete cached
cookies or block certain
types of cookies altogether.
a supercookie refers to a
cookie that uses alternate
methods for storage, such as
flash cookies. in most cases,
these cookies are not deleted
by clearing the browser
cache, making them much
harder to find and remove. a
supercookie with its unique
identifier can therefore be
used to persistently track and
identify a particular user over
time, even if the user attempts
to block or delete cookies.
cookies, third-party cookies,
and supercookies8
why would someone be
gathering this particular
data in this manner? what
could be the purpose behind
this activity?
although the witchcoven profiling activity may seem insidious or intrusive, so far nothing we have described is overtly
malicious. no exploit code has been delivered.
no website visitors have been compromised.
as we noted above, these types of profiling and
tracking techniques have legitimate purposes to
optimize user experience and support marketing,
demographic and sales analysis. so why did this
particular activity capture our attention?
first, while many sites engage in profiling and
tracking for legitimate purposes, those activities
are typically conducted using normal third-party
browser-based cookies and commercial ad
services and analytics tools. in this case, while
the individuals behind the activity used publicly
available tools, those tools had very specific
purposes. using evercookie in particular implies
that the actors wanted to ensure that visitors
could be identified and tracked persistently
over time, without having to worry about users
enabling private browsing or deleting persistent
cookies. this goes beyond normal web analytics.
second, the legitimate websites that redirected
visitors to the witchcoven script were
themselves compromised. this was not part
of a generic marketing campaign or routine
web traffic analysis; someone deliberately and
surreptitiously placed the redirect code on
more than 100 compromised websites to profile
visitors to those sites.
finally as we discuss below while the redirect
code was widespread, the compromised websites
themselves were not arbitrary, but fell into
an overall pattern. this led us to believe that
the activity was not random, but targeted, and
targeted at a specific set of users for what we
believe is a unique purpose.
these observations led us to ask the questions:
why would someone be gathering this particular
data in this manner? what could be the purpose
behind this activity?
we believe that the computer profiling data
gathered by the witchcoven script, combined
with the evercookie that persistently identifies
a unique user, can when combined with basic
browser data available from http logs be used
by cyber threat actors to identify users of interest
and narrowly target those individuals with exploits
specifically tailored to vulnerabilities in their
computer system.
a means
to a
sinister
end?9
how could mostly innocuous information-gathering lead to insidious, personalized attacks? consider the implications of the data available to the witchcoven threat actors.
in addition to the data explicitly collected by witchcoven
itself, the threat actors behind this activity would also have access
to additional data about the user s browser, captured as part of
normal web traffic in the http logs of the compromised server
hosting the witchcoven script. this data would likely contain,
at minimum,8 standard information such as: the threat actors behind this activity
would also have access to additional
data about the user s browser, captured
as part of normal web traffc in the http
logs of the compromised server hosting
the witchcoven script.
assembling
the pieces
8 extensive research has been conducted on browser fingerprinting using data available from a user s web browser to uniquely identify individual users. while we have no indication that the
individuals behind witchcoven are leveraging browser fingerprinting to the full extent possible, the research shows the extent to which innocuous browser data can be used to identify
individuals with a high degree of accuracy. see, for example, the electronic frontier foundation s panopticlick website ( ) illustrating this issue, and their
associated whitepaper ( ).
the user s ip address browser language
settings (via the acceptlanguage header)
how a visitor arrived
at the site (via the
referer header)
browser type and
version (via the useragent header)10
although we do not know for certain whether
the threat actors are making use of the log data,
the data would be readily available to them. if we
summarize the data available to the attackers (see
table 1), we see how they could build up a profile
table 1: data available to threat actors and possible use
data source possible use
version of microsoft office witchcoven script identify older, unpatched, or vulnerable
applications
version of browser plugins (java, flash,
etc.)
witchcoven script identify older, unpatched, or vulnerable
applications
evercookie unique identifier evercookie (witchcoven script) identify specific user (even if identity not
known)
evercookie date evercookie (witchcoven script) date/time of first visit to any of the
compromised sites; timestamp can be
correlated with http logs to identify visitor
ip address
referring website witchcoven script and
http logs
may help further identify or refine victim
profile
ip address http logs source network of potential victim;
may identify a particular corporation or
organization of interest
browser type / version http logs identify older, unpatched, or vulnerable
browsers; identify browser with which
another exploit (such as a flash exploit)
must be compatible
user s language http logs may help further identify or refine victim
profile
of potential victims. the threat actors could
leverage the same data also used by legitimate
businesses to perform web analytics to identify
and profile users for potential malicious activity.11
while the information above is potentially quite revealing about an individual user, it represents just one profile of one
random visitor to one website. the threat actors
behind witchcoven compromised more than
100 websites, each of which might have thousands
of unique visitors each day. if, as we suspect, the
culprits intended to use the data to target specific
victims, they would need some means to analyze
all of the data collected by the witchcoven
profiling script (and presumably the web server
log files) to identify specific targets for follow-on
cyber operations.
we do not know exactly how the threat actors
are using or processing the data. however,
given the amount of data they have presumably
1 determine whether desired types of victims are visiting the compromised sites
2 determine what other sites desired victims are visiting (to find possible new collection points)
3 identify specific victims
finding a
needle in
a pile of
needles
collected in a year of activity, it is likely that they
would need to use a large-scale data management
and analysis system. at a minimum, this would
involve a database of potential targets; it may
also involve performing web analytics on the
collected data to help identify targets of interest.
to do this, they may use web analytics tools such
as a customer relationship management (crm)
database just as many legitimate companies do. a
crm allows businesses to track sales, customer
interactions, and online marketing campaigns. the
threat actors behind this activity could mine the
collected data based on their targeting criteria,
searching for potential victims. the refinement
process might look something like this:12
figure 2 example of refining the targeting
intended
target
an american
diplomat assigned
to europe
target s real-life profile
lives in a major european city
primarily speaks english
spends time online gathering data
from european government and
policy websites
possible web analytics profile
supercookie tracking
shows that target
has visited other
infected embassy and
government websites
ip address shows
location / source
network matches that
of the intended target
user s web browser
has english as its
language setting13
employ the data
to deliver malware
once specific targets have been identified from the collected information, we believe the actors
behind this operation could design and deploy
highly tailored exploits to increase the chances
of compromising specific targets. we have not
yet observed any follow-on exploitation within
our customer base; however, it could be that
the threat actors targeting is so narrow and
highly focused that the odds of observing an
exploit and malware payload delivered to an
individual victim are extremely low.
despite the lack of confirmed follow-on
activity, the information the threat actors
collect could be used to deploy custom exploits
tailored to a victim s specific vulnerabilities as
identified in the witchcoven profiling and
designed to deliver malware to the victim s
computer. for example:
the perpetrators might note that a user is running an outdated version
of adobe flash, known to be vulnerable to particular exploits. the ability
to target older, known (but unpatched) vulnerabilities means the actors
would not have to risk use and exposure of more valuable exploits, such
as a zero-day exploit.
the discovery of outdated software versions might also provide
insights into the general security practices of the potential victim,
affecting the group s choices for follow-on activity or the use of
particular malware. the actors could use standard backdoors against
victims with only moderate defenses, saving sophisticated backdoors
for more vigilant environments.
if the user is running fully patched computer software, existing exploits
will be ineffective and the group will need to develop, procure, or deploy
a zero-day exploit. this knowledge would allow the group to limit the
use of zero-day exploits to a small group of high-value targets.
9 eng, erica and dan caselden. fireeye. operation clandestine wolf adobe flash zero-day in apt3 phishing campaign. 23 june 2015. /
operation-clandestine-wolf-adobe-flash-zero-day.html
10 fireeye labs. fireeye. operation russiandoll: adobe & windows zero-day exploits likely leveraged by russia s apt28 in highly-targeted attack. 18 april 2015. /
threat-research/2015/04/probable_apt28_useo.html
using victim profiling to smartly tailor
targeted operations
the threat actors behind the activity discussed in this report appear
to use an even more narrowly scoped approach to choose victims
than we have previously observed. other cyber threat groups have
also used scripts or other server-side code to profile potential victims
and narrowly deliver tailored exploits. for example, cyber criminals
have created websites that contain code that delivers malware only
to specific site visitors, such as those from a particular geographical
region (based on ip address) or to every 10th visitor (to limit exposure
of the malicious activity).
some of the skilled nation-state threat groups we track use similar
profiling scripts to ensure effective delivery of exploits and their
associated payloads.
n as part of operation clandestine wolf,9 the chinese advanced
persistent threat (apt) group apt3 used a profiling script
before deploying a flash zero-day exploit.
n during operation russian doll,10 the culprits, suspected to be
the russian group apt28, collected information about potential
victim systems before deploying two zero-day exploits.
in these cases, the profiling scripts only delivered the exploit code to
computers that were actually vulnerable. this technique increases the
likelihood of success, reduces exposure to security researchers because
only a few victims receive the exploit and likely delays the discovery of
the attackers valuable zero-day vulnerabilities.14
figure 3 potential uses for the collected data
collected data: how it could be used
follow-on custom exploitation
once the cyber threat actors have identified their victims and the exploits likely to be successful, they
could deploy an additional script that runs after the witchcoven profiling script and is designed to
compromise a specific victim. as a simple example, this script could check the unique identifier in the
evercookie of a site visitor and deliver a specific exploit only if the identifier matches a target list. the
next time a targeted user browses that website, the script s logic would be triggered and an exploit
would be sent to the user's computer. limiting the delivery to only chosen victims would decrease the
likelihood of attracting the attention of security researchers and of the exploit script being noticed on
the web server.
spear phishing
the use of supercookies and browser fingerprints can track, profile and possibly identify individual users
based on unique identifiers. if the perpetrators were able to use additional data to link the identifier
to an individual, they could use the information gathered to create a well-crafted spear-phishing email
with an attachment designed to appeal directly to very specific details of the target s interests. the
attachment could be weaponized with an exploit explicitly chosen to compromise the victim s computer
configuration, greatly enhancing the likelihood of a successful infection.
human intelligence operations
the sponsor of this reconnaissance could use the collected information to build a profile to assist in
targeting an individual for traditional spying.
creation of a database of targets
apt actors have shown an interest in supporting their intelligence collection goals by amassing large
amounts of personal data, most likely to create databases to keep track of current and future targets of
interest. the threat actors could use the data collected to create a rich database of potential targets and
their associated computers.15
effective,
efficient
and
stealthy
we assess this activity most likely is the work of a state-sponsored group that aims to collect global reconnaissance data to enable future cyber operations. our assessment is based on:
scope of
operations
the operation collects information from
compromised websites around the globe.
data collection on this scale likely requires
ample resources to analyze the information
and identify targets. the scale of this
activity also implies that the threat actors
are seeking data to satisfy a sizeable list of
intelligence requirements, typical only of a
large nation state.
operational
restraint
strategic web compromises are not
uncommon; the unusual part of this
operation is the lack of any obvious exploit
or malware delivery. if the threat actors
are using the collected data for pinpoint
targeting, as we surmise, this implies a group
that wants to limit exposure of its tools
and maintain a high degree of operational
security both of which suggest this is
a long-term operation to fulfill specific
intelligence requirements.
probable
targets
based on the set of compromised websites,
the threat actors target individuals who
may be of high interest to a government
collecting intelligence.
as previously noted, we identified more than 100 compromised websites
hosting the redirect to the witchcoven profiling script. when viewed
as a whole, the sites were not random; they focused on a diverse but
relatively narrow set of interests. the compromised websites would attract
visitors involved in international travel, diplomacy, energy production and
policy, and international economics, as well as those serving in foreign
governments all individuals that would likely have information pertinent
to a state s strategic interests (see figure 4 for the industry breakdown of
compromised websites).
this activity most likely
is the work of a statesponsored group that
aims to collect global
reconnaissance data to
enable future cyber
operations.16
12%
10%
8%
7%
8%
5%
5%
4%
3%
3%
3%
higher education
and research
entertainment
and culture
ngo
international
law
embassy
media
energy
construction
and engineering
visa
services
consumer
goods
and retail
international
culture
and exchange
government
other
local
government
high
tech
figure 4 breakdown of compromised websites hosting the redirect to witchcoven script by industry as of nov. 1, 2015
government 16% international law 7% construction and engineering 3%
embassy 13% media 8% local government 3%
higher education and research 12% consumer goods and retail 5% visa services 3%
entertainment and culture 10% energy company 5% high tech 2%
ngo 8% international culture and exchange 4% other 6%
2%
6%
16%
13%
other includes business
services, healthcare,
management, manufacturing,
religious institution,
and tourism.17
breakdown of the assessed locations of the
organizations with compromised websites
belgium
france
spain
uk
finland
hungary
estonia
serbia
ukraine
romania
south africa
botswana
germany
switzerland
denmark
austria
uruguay
chile
bolivia
ecuador
jamaica
armenia
georgia
kazakhstan
turkmenistan
azerbaijan
kuwait
hong kong
indonesia
australia
india
guineabissau18
likely intended targets:
government officials and executives
in the u.s. and europe
we believe the compromised websites indicate the threat actors are especially interested in collecting data from
executives, diplomats, government officials and
military personnel, particularly those in the u.s.
and europe. the compromised websites include
visa services firms and certain embassies in the
united states, which may attract u.s. government
officials or executives traveling to russia, the
middle east and africa. the compromised sites in
europe probably attract internet users interested
in european politics, diplomacy, research
institutes and business ties between europe
and the united states. in addition, compromised
sites indicate the actors interest in targeting
individuals who work in the energy discovery,
production, and technology industries, particularly
those involved in natural gas extraction and other
energy-related activities. based on the focus of
other compromised sites, additional individuals of
interest might include:
n diplomats and business people in the united
states and spain, as well as vienna and
brussels, the headquarters of many global
intergovernmental institutions
n individuals involved in issues of energy policy
and climate change, particularly energy
research and consulting organizations
n latin american government officials
n european economists
n individuals and organizations with a nexus to
ukraine or the republic of georgia
focus on eastern europe and russian organizations
finally, other websites hosting the redirect suggest that those behind this activity
may have an interest in individuals with a nexus to:
a major russian
energy company
russian cultural
organizations and
information resources
a russian
embassy website
ukraine s security
services and border
guards
a media organization
operating in the
republic of georgia19
similar reporting
kaspersky labs, symantec, and isight partners
have all reported on widespread campaigns
similar to the activity we describe in this
report. in august 2014 kaspersky described
the epic turla operation,11 while in january
2015 symantec reported on the waterbug campaign.12 both operations combined strategic
web compromises (swcs) with profiling scripts
and malware delivery.13 isight s findings in the
spring of 201514 characterized an swc operation
whose targeting directly overlaps with the
witchcoven activity described in this paper.
collateral damage:
snaring unintended victims
common themes among compromised websites
suggest the culprits are interested in targeting
specific types of individuals. however, detections
of the witchcoven profiling script among
our customers demonstrate there is a more
widespread effect. swcs often leave a wake of
collateral damage, and the culprits inadvertently
snare unintended victims who happen to
navigate to their sites.
we have detected alerts for
witchcoven from
customer organizations in
nearly all industries.
we have detected alerts for witchcoven from
customer organizations in nearly all industries.15
education, government, financial services, energy,
and the entertainment industries appear to be
the most affected. figure 5 depicts the share
of detection alerts for witchcoven among
fireeye customers by industry from march 18
to oct. 31, 2015.
11 kaspersky labs. the epic turla operation: solving some of the mysteries of snake/uroburos. 7 aug 2014. /. accessed 28 oct 2015.
12 symantec. the waterbug attack group. 16 jan 2015. http:// . accessed 16 sep 2015.
13 the malware was identified as wipbot and turla, both suspected of being used by russian state-sponsored threat actors.
14 gertz, bill. state report reveals 130 compromised websites used in travel-related watering hole attacks. flash//critic. 4 april 2015. http:// /. accessed 15 september 2015.
15 these statistics are from fireeye customers who have opted to share anonymized data with fireeye. the data included in the fireeye dynamic threat intelligence (dti) platform allows the firm to gain
insights into cyber threat activity by gathering real-time information about the latest cyber threats worldwide. dti uses millions of fireeye sensors to perform more than 50 billion analyses over 400,000
unique malware samples every day.26%
16%
12%
8%
7%
6%
5% 5% 5%
4%
6%
20
breakdown of alerts
by industry
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
figure 5 fireeye customers, broken
down by industry, that were alerted
on the witchcoven profiling script
between march 18 and oct. 31, 2015
other: telecom,
transportation,
consumer
goods and retail,
aerospace and
defense, ngos,
agriculture
financial services
education
government
energy and utilities
legal
healthcare
entertainment,
media,
hospitality
manufacturing
services and
consulting
high
tech
othercustomers often ask for ways to mitigate the risk against the malicious cyber activity we observe. for the activity described in
this report, mitigation is a challenge because the
threat actors are collecting information about
potential targets in the course of a user's normal
web browsing activity. the collection is done using
similar scripts, tools and methods that legitimate
websites use to profile customers and enhance
the browsing experience.
while profiling may feel invasive, it does not
compromise a victim s computer. individuals and
organizations can take steps such as blocking
script execution or using third-party cookies,
mitigation
enabling privacy-enhanced browsing, or using
anonymization services (such as the tor browser)
to help mask their identity. however, these
measures may be burdensome to implement and,
while blocking potentially malicious activity, may
also prevent legitimate site content from loading.
organizations may be better off focusing on
detecting or preventing any follow-on attacks
through best practices, including disabling
unneeded plugins, ensuring that systems and
applications are patched, and monitoring hosts
and networks for suspicious traffic.
21
special report pinpointing targets: exploiting web analytics to ensnare victims22
appendix:
technical details
the witchcoven profiling script (example md5: ) is
written in javascript. the script contains the jquery javascript library that is obfuscated to remove
variable names. the full script is quite lengthy but is largely comprised of identical or slightly modified
versions of publicly available scripts, including evercookie, plugindetect and the detect office module
from the browser exploitation framework project.
the script gathers the information listed in table 1 and encodes it in a url request to the compromised
website hosting the witchcoven script.
table 2: url request variables
variable name variable data
sid adobe shockwave version
fid adobe flash version
aid adobe reader version
mid microsoft office version
jaid oracle java version
rid http referer
cid first date the evercookie supercookie was set (in
epoch time), or the current date if the evercookie
was never set
cart_id 55 (static value; may vary across witchcoven
instances) 2015 fireeye, inc. all rights reserved. fireeye is a registered trademark of
fireeye, inc. all other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks
or service marks of their respective owners. .en-us.112015
fireeye, inc. | 1440 mccarthy blvd. milpitas, ca 95035 | 408.321.6300 | 877.fireeye (347.3393) | info@ | www. to download this or other
fireeye threat intelligence reports,
visit: https://www. /reports.html