operation
saffron rose
2013
authors: nart villeneuve, ned moran,
thoufque haq and mike scott1 fireeye: operation saffron rose 2013
c
in this report, we document the activities of the
ajax security team, a hacking group believed to be
operating from iran. members of this group have
accounts on popular iranian hacker forums such as
ashiyane[.]org and shabgard[.]org, and they have
engaged in website defacements under the group
name ajaxtm since 2010. by 2014, the ajax
security team had transitioned from performing
defacements (their last defacement was in
december 2013) to malware-based espionage,
using a methodology consistent with other
advanced persistent threat actors in this region.
it is unclear if the ajax security team operates in
isolation or if they are a part of a larger
coordinated effort. the ajax security team itself
uses malware tools that do not appear to be
publicly available. we have seen this group
leverage varied social engineering tactics as a
means to lure their targets into infecting
themselves with malware. although we have not
observed the use of exploits as a means to infect
victims, members of the ajax security team have
previously used publicly available exploit code in
web site defacement operations.
in sum, fireeye has recently observed the ajax
security team conducting multiple cyber
espionage operations against companies in the
defense industrial base (dib) within the unites
states, as well as targeting local iranian users of
anti-censorship technologies that bypass iran s
internet filtering system.
background
the transition from patriotic hacking to cyber
espionage is not an uncommon phenomenon. it
typically follows an increasing politicization within
the hacking community, particularly around
geopolitical events. this is followed by increasing
links between the hacking community and the
state, particularly military and/or intelligence
organizations.
in the late 1990 s and early 2000 s, a similar
transition occurred within the chinese hacking
community. during that time period, the chinese
hacking community engaged in website
defacements and denial of service attacks in
conjunction with incidents such as the accidental
bombing of the chinese embassy in belgrade in
1999, the collision of a u.s. spy plane and a
chinese military plane in 2001, and the japanese
prime minister s controversial visit to the
yasukuni shrine in 2005.4 around this time a
significant shift in philosophy began to take place.
members of the chinese hacking community that
participated in such attacks soon found that
transitioning to cyber espionage was more
rewarding both in terms of developing a more
advanced skill set as well as in monetary
remuneration. one group known as ncph
(network crack program hacker), whose
founding member wicked/withered rose was a
patriotic hacker, made the transition to cyber
espionage by founding a hacker-for-hire group
we believe we re seeing an evolution and development in iranian-based cyber activity. in
years past, iranian actors primarily committed politically-motivated website defacement
and ddos attacks.1 more recently, however, suspected iranian actors have destroyed data
on thousands of computers with the shamoon virus,2 and they have penetrated the navy
marine corps intranet (nmci), which is used by the u.s. navy worldwide.3
1 hp security research. threat intelligence briefing episode 11 . february 2014.
2 perlroth, n. in cyberattack on saudi firm, u.s. sees iran firing back . october 2012.
3 gallagher, s. iranians hacked navy network for four months? not a surprise . february 2014.
4 key. honker union of china to launch network attacks against japan is a rumor . september 2010. that simultaneously developed an association with
the chinese military.5 the group began developing
zero-day exploits, rootkits and remote access
tools (rats) using them in attacks against a
variety of targets including the u.s. department of
defense.6 (one of this group s associates, whg , is
still active and is believed to have developed one
variant of the plugx/sogu malware.7) the
rationale behind this transition within the chinese
hacking community is nicely summed up in a
message by the honker union of china to its
members in 2010:
what benefit can hacking a web page bring our
country and the people? it is only a form of
emotional catharsis, please do not launch any
pointless attacks, the real attack is to fatally
damage their network or gain access to their
sensitive information.8
in iran, the hacking community appears to be
undergoing a similar transformation. while a
variety of iranian hacker groups had engaged in
politically motivated website defacements, the
emergence of the iranian cyber army in 2009
demonstrated a concentrated effort to promote
the iranian government s political narrative
online .9 they targeted, among others, news
organizations, opposition websites and social
media.10 this marked the beginning of a largescale cyber offensive against the perceived
enemies of the iranian government.
foreign news and opposition websites are
routinely blocked in iran, as are the tools that
allow users in iran to bypass these restrictions.11
one of the key stakeholders in iran s internet
censorship program is the iranian revolutionary
guard corps (irgc), under which the basij
paramilitary organization operates.
the basij formed the basij cyber council and
actively recruits hackers in order to develop both
defensive and offensive cyber capabilities.12 there
is increasing evidence to suggest that the hacker
community in iran is engaged in a transition from
politically motivated defacements and denial of
service attacks to cyber espionage activities. this
model is consistent with the basij s recruitment of
paramilitary volunteer hackers to engage in less
complex hacking or infiltration operations leaving
the more technical operations to entities over
which they have increasingly direct control.13
as such, the capabilities of threat actors operating
from iran have traditionally been considered
limited.14 however, the shamoon attacks, which
wiped computers in saudi arabia and qatar,
indicate an improvement in capabilities.15 and
unsurprisingly, iran has reportedly increased its
efforts to improve offensive capabilities after
being targeted by stuxnet and flame.16
5 elegant, s. enemies at the firewall . december 2007. dunham, k. & melnick, j. wicked rose and the ncph hacking group .
wikipedia. network crack program hacker group .
6 dunham, k. & melnick, j. wicked rose and the ncph hacking group .
7 blasco, j. the connection between the plugx chinese gang and the latest internet explorer zeroday . september 2012.
8 key. honker union of china to launch network attacks against japan is a rumor . september 2010.
9 opennet initiative. after the green movement: internet controls in iran 2009 2012 . february 2013.
10 rezvaniyeh, f. pulling the strings of the net: iran s cyber army . february 2010. twitter hackers appear to be shiite group . december 2009.
11 opennet initiative. iran . june 2009.
12 the irgc has also indicated that they would welcome hackers that support the iranian government. esfandiari, g. iran says it welcomes hackers who work for islamic republic . march 2011, hp security research. threat intelligence briefing episode 11 . february 2014.
13 bbc persian. structure of iran s cyber warfare .
14 mandiant. m-trends: beyond the breach, 2014 , page 9. april 2014.
15 mount, m. u.s. officials believe iran behind recent cyber attacks . october 2012.
16 shalal-esa, a. iran strengthened cyber capabilities after stuxnet: u.s. general . january 2013, lim, k. iran s cyber posture . november 2013. 7 bloomberg. neiman marcus hackers set off 60,000 alerts while bagging credit card data. february 2014.
attack vectors
we have observed the ajax security team use a
variety of vectors to lure targets into installing
malicious software and/or revealing login
credentials. these attack vectors include sending
email, private messages via social media, fake login
pages, and the propagation of anti-censorship
software that has been infected with malware.
spear phishing
during our investigation, we discovered that these
attackers sent targeted emails, as well as private
messages through social media. for example, the
attackers targeted companies in the dib using a
fake conference page as a lure to trick targets into
installing malicious software. the attackers
registered the domain aeroconf2014[.]org in
order to impersonate the ieee aerospace
conference the conference s actual domain is and sent out an email with the
following information:
from: invite@aeroconf2014[.]org
subject: ieee aerospace conference 2014
the email encouraged users to visit a fake
conference website owned by the attackers:
upon visiting the website, visitors were notified
that they must install proxy software in order to
access it, which is actually malware.
figure 1: the fake
ieee aerospace
conference website credential phishing
the attackers have also used phishing attacks, in
which they set up web pages to emulate various
services that require security credentials. the
attackers tailored these login pages for specific
targets in the dib and spoofed a variety of services
such as outlook web access and vpn login pages.
if users attempt to login through these fake web
pages, the attackers collect their login credentials.
anti-censorship tools
all internet service providers (isps) in iran are
required to implement filtering technology that
censors access to content which the iranian
government deems unacceptable.17 this content
includes categories such as pornography and
political opposition.18 in response to these
restrictions, iranians have been increasingly using
software that bypasses such filtering technology.
to counter anti-censorship efforts, iran has
attempted to block the use of certain software
tools.19 in 2012, researchers found that an
anti-censorship tool that is primarily used by
internet users in iran was bundled with malware
and redistributed.20
our investigation found that malware-laden
versions of legitimate anti-censorship software,
such as psiphon and ultrasurf, were distributed to
users iran and persian speaking people around the
world.
figure 2: the fake outlook
web access page
17 opennet initiative. iran . june 2009.
18 opennet initiative. after the green movement: internet controls in iran 2009 2012 . february 2013.
19 torbati, y. iran blocks use of tool to get around internet filter . march 2013.
20 marquis-boire, m. iranian anti-censorship software simurgh circulated with malicious backdoor . may 2012. the stealer malware
host-based indicators and malware
functionality
we have observed the ajax security team use a
malware family that they identify simply as stealer .
they deliver this malware as a malicious executable
(dropper). the executable is a cab extractor that
drops the implant . this implant, in turn,
drops various other components into c:\
documents and settings\{user}\application
data\intelrapidstart\. the following files are
written to disk in this location:
the is written in .net and is aptly
named stealer , as it has various data collection
modules. it drops and launches via the following command: c:\
documents and settings\{user}\application
data\intelrapidstart\ ,#110
110 is an ordinal that corresponds to startbypass export in .
file functionality various stealer components and encryption implementation browser url extraction, ie accounts, rdp accounts (imported by ) .config config containing supported .net versions for ftp exfiltration (launched by )
rapidstarttech.stl base64 encoded config block containing ftp credentials, implant name, decoy name, screenshot
interval and booleans for startup, keylogger and screenshot
figure 3: startbypass
ordinal data exfiltration is conducted over ftp by , which acts as an ftp client.
this dll is written in delphi. there is code to
exfiltrate data over http post as well, but it is
unused. we also found incomplete code that would
perform sftp and smtp exfiltration, which could
be completed in a future version.
state is maintained between the stealer
component and the ftp component using a file from the ftp
server , as well as a global atom sqlitefinish . waits in an indefinite
loop, until defines this state.
once the state is set, proceeds to
collect data from various areas in the system as
described below: collects system information: hostname,
username, timezone, ip addresses, open ports,
installed applications, running processes, etc. performs key logging takes various screenshots harvests instant messaging (im) account
information: gtalk, pidgin, yahoo, skype tracks credentials, bookmarks and history
from major browsers: chrome, firefox, opera collects email account information extracts installed proxy software
configuration information harvests data from installed cookies loads a delphi component called , which implements some
additional data theft functionality for the following: internet explorer (ie) accounts remote desktop protocol (rdp) accounts browser urls
figure 4: apptransferwizard.
dll creates and
global atom
figure 5: sleeps
until global atom is set and is present the stealer component uses common techniques
to acquire credential data. for instance, it loads and uses various apis shown below to
acquire rdp accounts from the windows vault.
harvested data is encrypted and written to disk on
the local host. the filenames for these encrypted
files follow this naming scheme:
{stolen data type}_{victim system name}_
yyyymmdd_hhmm.enc
the {stolen data type} parameter indicates where
the data was harvested from (e.g., a web browser,
an instant messenger application, installed proxy
software).
analysis of the malware indicates that the data is
encrypted via a rijndael cipher implementation;
more specifically it uses aes which is a specific set
of configurations of rijndael. it uses a key size of
256 bytes and block size of 128 bytes, which
conforms to the fips-197 specification of
aes-256.21 it utilizes the passphrase havijebaba and a salt of salam!*%# as an input to pbkdf2
(password-based key derivation function 2) to
derive the key and initialization vector for the
encryption.22 this key derivation implementation in
.net is done using the rfc2898derivebytes
class.23 the passphrase and salt are persian
language words. havij means carrot , baba means father , and salam is a common greeting
that means peace .
figure 6: acquiring rdp
accounts
sample timeline
we identified 17 droppers during this research,
including:
the 2009 compile time appears to have been
forged, while the 2013 compile times may be
legitimate.
in some cases, we found an implant but not the
parent dropper. in total, 22 of the 23 implants that
we identified during our research had unique
compile times ranging from 2013-10-29 until
2014-03-15. we identified two implants that were
both compiled on 2014-3-15 at 23:16. these
compile times appear to be legitimate and coincide
with attempted intrusion activity attributed to
these attackers.
spoofed installers
many of the malicious executables (droppers) that
we collected were bundled with legitimate
installers for vpn or proxy software. examples
include:
bundled with an installer for ultrasurf proxy
software.
bundled with an installer for gerdoovpn
virtual private network software.
bundled with an installer for the psiphon
proxy.
bundled with an installer for proxifier
software.
these droppers were also designed to visually
spoof the appearance of the above applications.
these droppers contained icons used in the
legitimate installers for these programs.
figure 7: icon for the psiphon
anti-censorship tool process debug (pdb) strings
analysis of the pdb strings seen in the implants
indicates that there may be more than one
developer working on the source code for the
stealer builder. the following two pdb paths were
seen in the collection of implants that we these strings indicate that the stealer source
code was stored in two different paths but not
necessarily on two different computers. the f:\
projects\ path may be from an external storage
device such as a thumb drive. it is therefore
possible that only one person has access to the
source code, but keeps a separate repository on
an external storage device. alternatively, the
different file paths could be the result of two
different actors storing their source code in two
different locations.
builder artifacts
in nine of the implants that we collected, we found
a consistent portable executable (pe) resource
with a sha256 of
resource contains the vs_version_info. in
layman s terms, this can best be described as the
metadata describing the executable file. this
specific pe resource contained the
following information:
note the internalname of . this is the
attackers name for this malware family.
vs_version_info
varfileinfo
translation
stringfileinfo
000004b0
comments
process for windows
companyname
microsoft
filedescription
process for windows
fileversion
internalname legalcopyright
copyright
originalfilename productname
process for windows
productversion
assembly version the stealer builder and tools
during our research, we recovered two different
tools used by the members of the ajax security
team in conjunction with targeted intrusion
activities. the first tool, labeled the stealer builder was compiled on 2014-04-08. this compile date
may indicate that the group is still active.
upon executing the stealer builder the user is
presented with an option to load the builder or to decrypt logs generated from a victim and
exfiltrated to a command-and-control (cnc) server
under the groups control.
the builder option enables an attacker to
configure a new stealer backdoor. the user can
configure the new backdoor to connect to a
specific cnc server with a personalized username
and password. the attacker can bind the backdoor
to a legitimate application of his or her choosing, or
they can cloak it with an icon designed to make the
backdoor appear as though it is a legitimate file.
we also noted that the builder did not allow the
attacker to select a new passphrase or salt used to
encrypt the stolen data. the passphrase havijebaba and a salt of salam!*%# are both
hardcoded into the builder.
generated by this stealer builder had a timestamp
of 2013-12-19. we had one backdoor in our
repository with this same timestamp. this sample
was configured to exfiltrate data to ultrasms[.]ir.
the vs_version_info pe resource mentioned
above (sha256
the stealer builder that we recovered. the builder
generates an executable named intelrapidstart.
exe. this executable contains the aforementioned
vs_version_info pe resource.
we also recovered a tool designed to encode
plaintext into base64 encoded text or decode
base64 encoded text into plaintext. members of
the ajax security team likely this use tool to
encode the configuration data seen in
rapidstarttech.stl files. as noted above, the
rapidstarttech.stl contains the backdoor s ftp
credentials, implant name, decoy name, and
screenshot interval, along with boolean settings for
startup, keylogger, and screenshot plugins.
encoding and decoding base64 data is a
straightforward task and the standard linux
operating system offers a number of command line
tools to achieve this task. the presence of a
windows-based gui tool that simplifies encoding
and decoding base64 data indicates that these
tools may have been developed for less adept
users.
figure 10: base64 encoder command-and-control infrastructure
the cnc infrastructure consists of distinct, but
linked, clusters that have targeted both the users
of anti-censorship tools in iran as well as defense
contractor companies in the u.s.
the first cluster contains the domain used in the
aerospace conference attack as well as the
domains used in phishing attacks designed to
capture user credentials:
the website used in the aerospace conference
attack was aeroconf2014[.]org, which is registered
to [.]us. however, historical whois
information shows that the domain was registered
by keyvan.ajaxtm@gmail[.]com the same domain
used to register ajaxtm[.]org, the website of the
ajax security team. the same email addresses
were used to register variations of domain names
associated with popular services provided by
companies such as google, facebook, yahoo and
linkedin.
figure 11: ajax security
team s phishing
infrastructure the second cluster comprises the cnc
infrastructure used in the anti-censorship attacks.
the majority of the samples we analyzed connect
to intel-update[.]com and update-mirror[.]com,
which were registered by james.mateo@aim[.]com.
the domain intel-update[.]com resolved to the ip
address , which also hosted
domains registered by osshom@yahoo[.]com, many
of which are consistent with the pattern of
registering domains with associations to google
and yahoo services. we also observed crossover
with a sample that connected to both intelupdate[.]com and ultrasms[.]ir, which was
registered by lvlr98@gmail[.]com.
figure 12: ajax security
team s stealer cnc
infrastructure
figure 13: overlap between the
phishing and stealer clusters these two clusters are linked by a common ip
address ( ), which is used by both ns2.
aeroconf2014[.]org and office.windowsessentials[.]tk.
a third cluster of activity was found via analysis of . this
sample is a stealer variant that connects to the
aforementioned intel-update[.]com as well as
plugin-adobe[.]com. the domain plugin-adobe[.]
com resolved to . other domains
seen resolving to ip address nearby include the
following:
aside from the sample connecting to pluginadobe[.]com, we have not discovered any malware
connecting to these domains.
victimology
during our investigation, we were able to recover
information on 77 victims from one cnc server
that we discovered while analyzing malware
samples that were disguised as anti-censorship
tools. while analyzing the data from the victims, we
found that the majority had either their timezone
set to iran standard time or had their language
setting set to persian: 44 had their timezone set to iran standard
time (37 of those also have their language set
to persian) of the remaining 33, 10 have persian
language settings 12 have either proxifier or psiphon installed
or running (all 12 had a persian language
setting and all but one had their timezone set
to iran standard time )
the largest concentration of victims is in iran,
based on the premise that persian language
settings and iran standard time correlate the
victim to be geographically located in iran. as such,
we believe that attackers disguised malware as
anti-censorship tools in order to target the users of
such tools inside iran as well as iranian dissidents
outside the country.
domain ip first seen last seen 2013-11-28 2014-4-10
privacy- 2014-02-14 2014-02-23
xn--google- 2013-12-08 2014-01-15 2014-02-20 2014-02-20
accounts- 2013-12-31 2014-02-20
users- 2014-01-15 2014-01-15
xn--facebook- 2013-11-27 2014-03- attribution
the ajax security team appears to have been
formed by personas named hurr!c4ne! and cair3x in 2010.24 both members were engaged in
website defacements prior to the forming of the
ajax security team, and both were members of
iranian hacker forums such as ashiyane[.]org and
shabgard[.]org. other members include 0day , mohammad pk and crim3r . the ajax security
team website at ajaxtm[.]org had a web forum
with at least 236 members. the group published
several exploits for content management systems
and engaged in defacements.25 initially, the
defacements seemed to be motivated by a desire
to demonstrate the group s prowess they even
defaced an iranian government website.26
however, the group appears to have become
increasingly political. for example, in a blog post in
2012, cair3x announced the targeting of iran s
political opponents.
figure 14: cair3x s original
blog post and translation
hacking anti-revolution political and opposition websites
hello to everyone, after a while of operating underground
and enhancing our company s projects and getting close to
24 june 2012, and the martyrdom of ayatollah dr. beheshti
and 72 of imam khomeini s (first and former supreme
leader of iran) followers, we have planned a project/
initiative to attack anti-revolution and political
websites against the islamic republic. and in late hours
of wednesday, june 24, 2012, we attacked these websites
and defaced them by writing the words we are young but
we can on their websites. this is so the enemies of this
country know that the blood of our martyr will never be
in vain and they will always be remembered in the heart
of gallant iranians.
have dwindled. there have been no defacements
since december 2013. the website and forum at
ajaxtm[.]org operated by hurr!c4ne! , aka k3yv4n , is no longer active. hurr!c4ne! has the most open/documented
internet persona of the ajax security team. he
registered the ajaxtm[.]org domain name using the
email address keyvan.ajaxtm@gmail[.]com. this
was also the email address used to register the
domain aerospace2014[.]org, which was used in
spear phishing attacks against companies in the
u.s. and is linked with malware activity directed at
users of anti-censorship tools in iran.
figure 15: screenshot of the
defacement content used in
#opusa
27 ashraf, n. #opisrael: hacktivists starting cyber attack against israel on 7th of april . march 2013. opusa targeting government & financial sectors on
07 may 2013: likely tools, targets and mitigating measures . may 2013. hurr!c4ne! features prominently in all the
group s activities and defacements. although there
has been a decline in public-facing ajax security
team activity, this coincides with an increase in
malware activity linked to the group s
infrastructure. ~2009 membership in and forums 2010 2012 defacements, release of exploits
for cms 2012 2013 increasing politicization,
participation on #opisrael, #opusa 2013 2014 transition to cyber-espionage
the increasing politicization of the ajax security
team aligns with the timing of their activities
against the perceived enemies of iran. in addition
to attacking companies in the u.s., they have
targeted domestic users of anti-censorship
technology.
while the objectives of this group are consistent
with iran s efforts at controlling political dissent
and expanding offensive cyber capabilities, the
relationship between this group and the iranian
government remains inconclusive.
for example, the ajax security team could just be
using anti-censorship tools as a lure because they
are popular in iran, in order to engage in activities
that would be considered traditional cybercrime. in
one case, hurr!c4ne! , using the email address
keyvan.ajaxtm@gmail[.]com, has been flagged for
possible fraud by an online retailer. while hurr!c4ne! is engaged in operations that align
with iran s political objectives, he may also be
dabbling in traditional cybercrime.
this indicates that there is a considerable grey area
between the cyber espionage capabilities of iran s
hacker groups and any direct iranian government
or military involvement.
on the spectrum of state responsibility, these
attacks align with state-encouraged attacks, which
are defined as attacks in which:
third parties control and conduct the attack, but
the national government encourages them as a
matter of policy.28
recruiting hackers through this model allows iran
to influence their activities, and provides the
iranian government plausible deniability, but a lack
of direct control also means that the groups may be
unpredictable and engage in unsanctioned attacks.
figure 16: screenshot
of an online retailer s
fraud alert
28 healey, j. beyond attribution: seeking national responsibility for cyber attacks . january 2012. conclusion
the increased politicization of the ajax security
team, and the transition from nuisance
defacements to operations against internal
dissidents and foreign targets, coincides with
moves by iran aimed at increasing offensive cyber
capabilities. while the relationship between actors
such as the ajax security team and the iranian
government is unknown, their activities appear to
align with iranian government political objectives.
the capabilities of the ajax security team remain
unclear. this group uses at least one malware
family that is not publicly available. we have not
directly observed the ajax security team use
exploits to deliver malware, but it is unclear if they
or other iranian actors are capable of producing or
acquiring exploit code.
while the ajax security team s capabilities remain
unclear, we know that their current operations
have been somewhat successful as measured by
the number of victims seen checking into to an ajax
security team controlled cnc server. we believe
that if these actors continue the current pace of
their operations they will improve their capabilities
in the mid-term.
