operation woolen-goldfish
when kittens go phishing
cedric pernet and kenney lutrend micro legal disclaimer
the information provided herein is for general
information and educational purposes only. it is not
intended and should not be construed to constitute
legal advice. the information contained herein may
not be applicable to all situations and may not re ect
the most current situation. nothing contained herein
should be relied on or acted upon without the beneft
of legal advice based on the particular facts and
circumstances presented and nothing herein should
be construed otherwise. trend micro reserves the
right to modify the contents of this document at any
time without prior notice.
translations of any material into other languages
are intended solely as a convenience. translation
accuracy is not guaranteed nor implied. if any
questions arise related to the accuracy of a
translation, please refer to the original language
offcial version of the document. any discrepancies
or differences created in the translation are not
binding and have no legal effect for compliance or
enforcement purposes.
although trend micro uses reasonable efforts to
include accurate and up-to-date information herein,
trend micro makes no warranties or representations
of any kind as to its accuracy, currency, or
completeness. you agree that access to and use
of and reliance on this document and the content
thereof is at your own risk. trend micro disclaims all
warranties of any kind, express or implied. neither
trend micro nor any party involved in creating,
producing, or delivering this document shall be liable
for any consequence, loss, or damage, including
direct, indirect, special, consequential, loss of
business profts, or special damages, whatsoever
arising out of access to, use of, or inability to use,
or in connection with the use of this document, or
any errors or omissions in the content thereof. use
of this information constitutes acceptance for use in
an as is condition. introduction
state-sponsored cyberwarfare is no different than physical battles or terrorist attacks in terms of scope and damage.
arguably, cyber attacks are much worse because the identity of attackers are easily concealed, slowing down any
process that could bring perpetrators to justice. attackers are also not restricted by time and location. interestingly,
middle eastern countries and some members of the european union (eu) have recently fgured in targeted attacks,
either as an aggressor or a victim, for seemingly political reasons.
at the recently concluded 31st chaos communication congress of the chaos computer club (31c3), cybersecurity
researchers discussed the ways and means by which threat actors can use widely available software to cover their
tracks and carry out their campaigns. [1] the focus of this particular lecture was the ghole malware used in targeted
attack campaigns. ghole is believed to have been active since 2011 based on the compilation date of its oldest samples.
targeted attacks are well-planned cyberthreat activities aimed at specifc organizations. in this paper, we delve
into the malicious activities of a cyberthreat group, known in the cybersecurity industry as rocket kitten, which has
been hitting different public and private israeli and european organizations. rocket kitten has so far launched two
campaigns ghole malware attacks and one we have dubbed operation woolen-goldfish. we named it as
such because woolen is attributed to the malware developer and one of the threat actors behind this campaign; goldfish serves as an attribute to the location of origin with which the campaign was seemingly launched from.
the rocket kitten group used spear-phishing emails in order to penetrate their target systems. based on the malware
samples we have obtained from fles with macro malware specifc to the ghole malware campaign, we found that
they were mostly interested in the defense industry, the it sector, government entities, and academic organizations.
certain details from the malware samples show that operation woolen-goldfish was most likely to be a statesponsored campaign.operation woolen-goldfish research paper
victims and targets
the content of the fles we have collected from this group of attackers is quite straightforward. they contain
information that is very customized in relation to the target entity. some fles are written in german, while
others contain information specifc to just one vertical. all of these have been used for spear-phishing emails
against various targets.
seeing the content of these fles, we suspect they have all been used for spear phishing against the following: civilian organizations in israel academic organizations in israel german-speaking government organizations european organizations european private company
attack overviewoperation woolen-goldfish research paper
rocket kitten s new campaign matures
the ghole campaign
in february 2015, the trend micro smart protection network received an alert from europe that triggered
several targeted attack indicators related to a specifc malware family, prompting our threat defense experts
to investigate further. the alert showed an infected microsoft excel fle that soon proved to have been
launched by rocket kitten. when a user opens the excel fle attachment in the spear-phishing attempt, a .dll
fle is dropped onto the system and is executed using a macro embedded in the fle. macros are small scripts
within fles that are usually used to automate common repetitive tasks. however, these can also be used for
malicious intent, such as infecting machines of unsuspecting users with malware, just like in this situation.
trend micro detects the malware as troj_ghole.a. it is common for rocket kitten to use ghole in their
targeted attack campaigns. the dropped .dll fle (sha1 hash: ; ) is scanned on virustotal, but there were no results, raising further interest to analyze the
binary. [2 3]
the .dll fle contained an export function named, function, instead of the usual, gholee, found in previous
samples from this malware family. we suspect that the attacker did this on purpose so the malware can bypass
detection and stay within the targeted system that would eventually give it more freedom to move laterally.
export function, function
use of the push mnemonic to
pass values in the code
ip address
export function: function
the top-right boxed code in the screenshot, displayed to the right, shows
an unusual code that uses push to pass values like those shown in the
screenshots below it. when passed to winapi, it will look like a string on
stack.
the frst block contains the address of the command-and-control (c&c)
server of the malware, which is located at ip address, . this
value is specifed in the code, as shown in the third screenshot.
the second boxed code in function, zkxdu80x, is the client version. the
third is an encryption key with a length of 256 bytes (2,048 bits) used for
network communications, and starts with the pattern,
get /index.php?c=xxxxxxxx&r=xxxxx&u=1&t=.
in all samples we have analyzed, the c argument is 8 bytes long and
differs across variants. this can be used as a unique identifer for each
of the infected machines. the r argument has a variable length, 5 7
bytes; the u argument is always 1 byte long.
other communication patterns can be found in the binary and can be
used as indicators of compromise: index.php?c=%s&r=%lx index.php?c=%s&r=%lx&u=1&t=%s index.php?c=%s&r=%xoperation woolen-goldfish research paper
related samples
we found several microsoft offce fles containing variants of the ghole malware family that were used to
infect machines. as the excel spreadsheet used in this campaign is disguised to look relevant and important,
users were prompted to open it and execute the embedded macro. the use of macros to infect computers is
deemed amateur. this shows that there is a gap between the maturity of the malware, which is good enough
for its purpose, and the way it is delivered, which raises questions about the attackers professional capacity.
we decided to look at the spear-phishing attempts from a wider perspective and analyzed more samples from
this malware family. based on available evidence, only the rocket kitten group is known to have used ghole
in the attacks related to operation woolen-goldfish. it is interesting to note that the ghole malware is in fact
a modifed core impact product. core impact is a sophisticated penetration-testing tool from core, a
legitimate company. [4]
sample content from malicious microsoft offce fles;
the attacker needs the user to enable the macro to
infect the computer
sample content from a malicious offce fle after
running the macro; the content is common and
publicly available on the internetoperation woolen-goldfish research paper
after studying the sample infected and dropped fles, we established a timeline using the dates when the
executable fles were compiled. this timeline should be reliable unless the attackers played with the time
stamps, which would be surprising in this campaign since all binary compilation dates ft quite well with the
spear-phishing attacks.
as is often the case with malware families specifcally used in targeted attacks, there are actually very few
different samples in the wild, compared with traditional cybercrime malware.
the microsoft offce fles used by the attackers to infltrate their targets networks are also very interesting
because they contain metadata. metadata can be defned as the information about the information, which
in this case is the information pertaining to the fle itself. some of details of the available metadata were
useful, particularly, the creation date, modifcation date, author, and last modifcation author. we will tackle the
metadata later on in this paper.
use of malware scanner
during the course of this investigation, we found out that some samples of the ghole malware have been
submitted to an online-malware-scanning site, , to estimate the detection rate of their malware.
[5] three samples appeared to have been scanned using this service before they appeared elsewhere. one
sample was submitted 26 days before it was scanned in other online malware analysis service sites. this
led us to believe that the malware controllers submitted the original samples to the system
themselves. we would like to point out that the online service is free and available to everyone
on the internet. we contacted a representative of the company, who in turn told us that they do not condone
cybercrime or in any way affliated to any entity that could have been part of this campaign. number of malware samples compiledoperation woolen-goldfish research paper
ghole malware communication and control
the communications established by this malware family from an infected workstation
to the c&c server are done by directly communicating with the ip addresses hardcoded in the binaries, as seen in the export function display. there were no domain
names involved in this campaign. we were able to obtain a list of c&c servers, which
are mostly hosted in germany, via a satellite communication service provider known
the last ip address, , was associated with one malware sample. it belongs
to iabg with only the following information available:
the other ip addresses were used by different malware samples. these ip addresses
also belonged to iabg and could all be connected to the same customer. in fact, all of
the ip ranges on which these c&c servers are identifed belonged to one customer,
who rents the following ip ranges from iabg:
netname: de-iabg-teleport-mahdavi_8
email: mahdavi@ registration for the domain used here expired in 2010. it was registered using this information:
registrant:
mehdi mahdavi mehdi_mahdavi@ +1.5149092726
joinebiz
2021 atwater street, #1414
montreal,qc,ca h3h-2p2
the frst historical information about this domain, in 2003, has the following details:
registrant:
mehdi mahdavi technical@ 514-989-8066
joinebiz
2021 atwater street, #1414
montreal, qc, canada h3h-2p2
screenshot from in 2001 was an e-business solution provider that ceased to operate in 2006. incidentally, it held offce in
isfahan, iran, which is the country mr. mehdi mahdavi used as reference for renting the ip ranges used by the
ghole malware.
these details can loosely be tied to the entities presented above but caution is strongly advised because the
names are quite common. we have yet to determine if these names belong to one person, if the same person
is the one who rents ip ranges from iabg, if his servers were compromised and used as proxy servers, or if he
provides part of his infrastructure to the operation woolen-goldfish targeted attack group.operation woolen-goldfish research paper
operation woolen-goldfish: rocket
kitten s new campaign
point of entry
sending out spear-phishing emails is a common
technique used as a point of entry in the initial stage
of compromise. it is, in fact, still widely used in
attempts to gain privileges in targeted companies systems. several social engineering tricks can be
used to make a user click a link or open a fle.
one of the spear-phishing emails sent out by the
rocket kitten group looked like a simple offce
correspondence.
the attachment was a microsoft offce fle. user
participation is needed to execute the macros in the
fle. if the user does not run the macros, the computer
will not be infected by the ghole malware. by the
end of 2014, however, we saw signifcant changes
in the attack behavior of the rocket kitten group in
terms of spear-phishing campaigns and malware
infection scheme. the second spear-phishing email
sample has been sent to one target in israel.
this email sample was sent sometime in february
2015. this also used the identity of a recognized
israeli engineer. we anonymized the email address,
as well as the onedrive link. we also removed the
signature used in it.
a known fgure in the israeli defense feld was used
in a similar tactic with the same email content. the
decoy fle used an adobe .pdf fle instead of a
microsoft powerpoint presentation. the .pdf fle
was a web article from the washington post. the fle
showed pc12 as the author and the last modifer.
system s record
sample spear-phishing email used by the group
in 2014
sample spear-phishing email sent to a targeted
organization in israeloperation woolen-goldfish research paper
initial compromise
the attackers used a onedrive link in their campaign. onedrive is a free online cloud
storage system from microsoft that comes with several gigabytes of data storage
capacity.
the onedrive link leads to an archive fle containing a fle named, iran s missiles . this fle, which has been taken of ine, used the powerpoint
icon but was really an executable fle. the attackers probably decided to store their
malicious binaries online rather than sent them as an attachment to bypass email
detection.
once executed, the fle drops a nonmalicious powerpoint fle used as a decoy
fle, while silently infecting the system with a variant of the cwoolger keylogger.
we decided not to show the content of this fle given the sensitivity of the persona
impersonated in this social engineering lure.
we tried to look for this decoy fle on the internet but it was nowhere to be found,
which was quite surprising. we compared the metadata on this fle with the other
fles authored by the spoofed engineer and it showed the same exact fle properties,
particularly the way the author feld was written. the fle also shows a last modifed
by: feld containing the information pc12.
rocket kitten has signed pc12 at the last modifed section of some of the fles used
in their spear-phishing activities. we do not know if this string refers to one rocket
kitten member or to a third party, who could have edited the fles. the latter is very
unlikely though, since it has been used both in campaigns and fles aimed at different
targets. we believe pc12 is, indeed, an indicator of rocket kitten activities.
we have a strong suspicion, based on the powerpoint fle, that the spoofed
engineer s computer was compromised by the rocket kitten group because he
presents an interesting profle and is well-known in his feld. therefore, the fle sent to
other israeli targets could have been stolen directly from this person s computer.
possible attribution
wool3n.h4t
cybercriminals quite often forget about metadata, which is generated by the software
they use to produce or modify the fles. those who are more meticulous alter this
information to lead investigators to false tracks.
malware binary
shows the
powerpoint icon to
trick the useroperation woolen-goldfish research paper
sha1 hash creation
date
modifcation
date author
last
modifed
by
microsoft offce fles and some of their metadata leaked by the attackersoperation woolen-goldfish research paper
as seen above, different authors worked on these fles. wool3n.h4t seemed to be the main author who
collaborated with aikido1 and hoffman. no particular information could be found on aikido1 and yusi, the
supposed partners of wool3n.h4t. there were also times when wool3n.h4t used u.s. and u.k. country codes
as last modifcation information. the most recent modifcation in the two powerpoint fles told us that w00l3n.h4t
slowly changed his infecting methods around october 2014.
there was not much information on wool3n.h4t, which is not a common nickname, on the internet. however,
we found that this nickname owned an inactive blog hosted by a free service in iran and was registered in
several underground hacking forums. the blog only contained two posts signed by masoud_pk, which could be
part of the real identity of wool3nh4t. masoud is the one of the top 50 commonly used frst names in iran.
part of wool3n.h4t s blog showing masoud_pk wool3n.h4t s recent activities: cwoolger keylogger
one malware sample surfaced as we tried to look for more information on wool3n.h4t. [7] we took interest in this
because the binary contained the following debug string: c:\users\wool3n.h4t\documents\visual studio 2010\projects\c- debug strings are strings that are sometimes left behind in binaries, revealing information about the developer
behind the code. this debug string shows us that the binary was compiled by a user account named wool3n.h4t, and that the project behind this code was dubbed cwoolger. this malware is a keylogger, although from a technical point of view, it is not as advanced as its
contemporaries. the malware also embedded some file transfer protocol (ftp) credentials of the attackers in
clear text in the binary.
consistent with the other malware used by the threat actors involved in operation woolen-goldfish, the c&c
reference is hard-coded as an ip address in the binary. a domain name was not used. moreover, it lands on the
system with a name, which is very similar to some ghole malware variants, { }.exe.
the malware starts by creating a mutex called woolger and creates a copy of itself, %temp% ,
in the temp folder before executing it. it creates a vbscript in the same folder named wsc.vbs. operation woolen-goldfish research paper
startup folder entry, showing the notepad icon but leading
to the malware
the wsc.vbs script in charge of installing the persistence
mechanism of the malware
the script installs the persistence mechanism of the malware, a link named, windefender, in the startup
folder, which uses the notepad icon.
it then enables keylogging by calling the setwindowshookexw application programming interface (api) and
calls settimer api to prepare a timer job for uploading the log fles.
once the machine is infected, the keylogger records all keystrokes in %temp% using the following
the upload function of this malware ran at specifc intervals based on a previous random value. if the log fle is
larger than 3,000 bytes, an uploadtocnc function will be called to transfer the log fle via ftp.
the c&c server reached in our sample is , which belongs to singlehop (as32475). the
credentials used to connect with the ftp server are hard-coded in clear text in the binary. when the fle is sent
to the server, it is renamed using the following format:
log_(username)_[tm_year]_[tm_mon]_[tm_mday]_[tm_hour]_[tm_min]_[tm_sec]
member type meaning range
tm_sec int seconds after the minute 0 61*
tm_min int minutes after the hour 0 59
tm_hour int hours since midnight 0 23
tm_mday int day of the month 1 31
tm_mon int months since january 0 11
tm_year int years since 1990
tm_wday int days since sunday 0 6
tm_yday int days since january 1 0 365
tm_isdst int daylight saving time ag
we have been able to detect other samples of this family acting in a similar way and referenced in the appendix. one of the
most recent samples was compiled on 7 february 2015.
upload function 