a trendlabssm research paper
the spy kittens
are back:
rocket kitten 2
cedric pernet
(trend micro cybersafety solutions team)
eyal sela
(clearsky research team)trend micro legal disclaimer building on the trend micro paper released this
march on operation woolen-goldfsh [1] and
the clearsky research on ghole malware [2]
(september 2014) and thamar reservoir [3],
we continued our efforts to monitor this
particular group of threat actors to see if
any of their movements have changed. trend
micro and clearsky continued monitoring
rocket kitten for the past months and decided
to join forces to release this paper. with new
attack cases that show the different tactics
and techniques that rocket kitten uses, we
want to shed further light on the group s
dealings and come closer to understanding
their motivations and goals and who they may
be representing.
our fndings show that rocket kitten is still
active, retains a growing level of persistence,
and acts ever more aggressively in terms of
attack method. we also found that recent
publications on the group s activity have done
nothing to change their behavior or reduce
their activity. they don t seem to bother
to have to disappear. with this paper, we
feel fairly certain that rocket kitten s prime
targets are not companies and political
organizations as entire bodies but individuals
that operate in strategically interesting felds
such as diplomacy, foreign policy research,
and defense-related businesses. we believe
the espionage factor and political context
make their attacks unique and very different
from traditional targeted attacks.section i
targeted attacks and
cyber espionage|
targeted attacks and cyber espionage
the greatest source of risk in cyberspace emanates from groups with the resources and commitment to
relentlessly target a company, a government agency, an organization, or even an individual until they
succeed in breaking in and taking what the victim values most. this usually involves an unauthorized
person gaining access to a network and staying there undetected for a long period of time via a targeted
attack. typically, the purpose of a targeted attack is to monitor target systems and exfltrate data from
these, as opposed to causing damage or disruption. therefore, there is an innate connection between
traditional espionage and targeted attacks. one can say that a targeted attack evolved from the tradecraft
of espionage. the diffculty very often lies in detecting targeted attacks in a timely manner and even more
in pinpointing attackers identities and their fnancial backers, understanding their motivations, and where
the attacks are coming from.
this is also the case when it comes to political espionage carried out in the cyberrealm. any espionage
activity does not usually go after monetary gain and it is very diffcult to attribute it to a certain group or
nation-state. the attackers can be anything from self-anointed cyber units with a political cause to cybercapable separatist groups, state-sponsored hackers, or actual covert intelligence agents. many times, such
instances of cyber espionage are attributed to nation-states because they are the most likely to have the
greatest motivation, they have the most to gain, and they are most capable of funding and maintaining
cyber-espionage efforts without being detected.
when we look at the rocket kitten case, we are not dealing with cybercriminals that conduct corporate
espionage to obtain access to sensitive documents or resell confdential information and intellectual
property. this is an obvious case of politically inspired or motivated espionage.section 2
rocket kitten:
persistent spies|
rocket kitten: persistent spies
attacker profle
since mid-2014, a group of attackers was observed by different computer security professionals, including
trend micro and clearsky. we have documented some of their moves. the set of targeted attack campaigns
have been dubbed rocket kitten and the perpetrators as the rocket kitten group. additional sources
indicate that the group may have been active as early as and increased their activities in 2014.
clearsky frst monitored attacks that involved ghole a malicious version of the core impact pro penetration-testing tool. core impact pro is a legitimate commercial security product that, being a powerful
investigative security tool, also bears some potential for misuse with malicious purposes. it is executed by
a malicious microsoft offce macro. following clearsky s research, gadi evron and tillmann werner, in
a presentation at the chaos communication congress (ccc), reported attacks conducted with the same
malware that according to them very strongly pointed to nation-state origin [4]. this march, trend micro
published a paper on operation woolen-goldfsh, which targeted a number of european businesses and
organizations via spear phishing [5]. this fnding showed a connection to the rocket kitten campaign seen
in december 2014. the trend micro paper also showed the use of a new exclusive piece of malware that
threat actors called cwoolger. just this june, clearsky detected new movements from the group, which showed an attack intensity that
exceeded our estimations by far. clearsky has learned of targets, most of which are located in the
middle east. it documented some fndings in thamar reservoir [6]. in this paper, trend micro and
clearsky combined research results to shed further light on rocket kitten s tactics and methods, and show
that the focus right now is very much on individuals rather than on organizations.|
apr
2014
may
jun
jul
aug
sep
oct
nov
dec
jan
2015
feb
mar
apr
may
jun
israeli academic institution
(first-seen attempt)
european defense-related
government institution
gadi evron & tillman werner
ccc presentation
clearsky thamar reservoir
research publishing
israeli academic institution
german government institution
israeli academic institution
israeli defense-industry-adjacent
company (reported to il-cert)
clearsky ghole malware
research publishing
trend micro operation woolengoldfish research publishing
european government institution
israeli defense contractor
israeli academic institution
iranian professor (expat)
reported victims
research presented/
published
timeline of rocket kitten-related activities
what is rocket kitten after?
from our monitoring efforts, our analysis of the attack setup, and the type of people targeted by the threat
actors, we drew the conclusion that rocket kitten mainly targets different verticals in the middle east.
their favorite targets seem to be involved in policy research, diplomacy, all aspects of international affairs,
defense, security, journalism, human rights, and others. we also observed attacks targeting organizations
located in europe but in the bigger scheme of things this activity is marginal (about 5% of the total number
of targeted attacks). the actors do not seem to be motivated by a hacktivist agenda. to us, it is not at all
clear what kind of specifc information rocket kitten is generally after but it is clear that it has to do with
espionage.|
as we have not seen what documents or information the actors typically look for when they obtain access to
a computer or what were exfltrated following a compromise, it is hard to speculate. from the facts that we
have, we can only assume what their motivation and goal may be, no evidence can support any attribution we
would claim at this point. what we know is that the individuals targeted often had strategically interesting
professions from a political or geostrategic perspective. they are scientists, journalists, researchers, and
sometimes expatriated iranians living in western countries. these facts suggest that rocket kitten may be
engaging some sort of foreign political espionage campaign and may want to fnd regime-opponents active
in driving policy in different ways. there are state actors in the region who are interested in gaining access
to the information that can be found in people s computers and emails. these people are professionally
affliated with the foreign policy and defense sectors and there is an interest in fnding out who they are
talking to and what kinds of action they support.section 3
tactics, tools,
and techniques|
tactics, tools, and techniques
strategy and standard operating procedure
as in any typical targeted attack, rocket kitten utilizes several different malware types and has a concrete
tactical setup to compromise an individual or an entity. this compromise seems to mainly serve the
purpose of monitoring communications and extracting information, in short, espionage. the victim may
be the desired target because the information he holds is valuable to the attacker but he may also just be a
stepping stone to reach the actual target.
rocket kitten s operating template, which remains constant in almost every case we have seen, has the
following components:
1. point of entry: rocket kitten uses spear phishing and social engineering to establish contact with
either the primary or secondary victim. this can be done by faking accounts and identities: using fake google drive or gmail accounts (the rocket kitten group often impersonated
persons of interest and public fgures such as israeli engineers.) using stolen documents that suggest a legitimate cause and sender using social media accounts as in facebook to directly contact targets, create rapport via private
messages, and log correspondence as well as consequently make users visit phishing websites
the spear-phishing email contains a link or a fle that when clicked or opened unleashes a payload that
takes over the target machine.
2. command-and-control (c&c) communication: the infected computer communicates with a
c&c server. it can download whatever malware is available or intended for the cause and purpose
of the attack.|
3
1
2
4
5
6
intelligence
gathering point of entry c&c communication lateral movement asset discovery data exfiltration maintenance
as soon as the actors get the user s password (through a request to type it sent via an email, a facebook
message, or a phone call), they take over the chosen account right away and any other accounts they can
get their hands on (facebook, other email accounts, and cloud accounts). they can employ a keylogger
(detected by trend micro as tspy_woolerg [7]) that logs keystrokes.
they can, for example, connect an application to your gmail account (in the cases we ve seen, microsoft
outlook obtained access to the gmail account as a connected app ) so we assume that the attackers
downloaded all of their victims emails for of ine processing.
they can also install any other piece of malware.
rocket kitten attack components|
simple tools and lack of professionalism
the rocket kitten group uses both relatively simple tools that we suspect they developed as well as more
advanced, publicly available ones, which may have been either purchased or stolen. what strikes us about
the attackers is that they don t seem to put much effort into quality assurance when it came to content how emails and phishing pages are formulated and so, make a lot of mistakes (typos and grammatical
errors). this, of course, makes patterns relatively easy to identify once we know what to look for. however,
the attackers do make up for these disadvantages with persistence. based on our research and profling, we
believe the members of the rocket kitten group could be former cybercriminals who ventured into a new
feld for some unclear reason and so use some of the methods they used to. many of their techniques are
typically observed in criminal endeavors.
persistence
the most notable rocket kitten strategy lies in numerous attempts to attack the same (chosen) targets for as
long as necessary, even if that means trying on a daily basis and with ever new cover stories and convincing
techniques to entice users. the idea is to barrage targets until they eventually slip and inadvertently allow
the attackers to obtain the desired information, whether primary or secondary in nature directly stealing
credentials from or taking control of victims computers. often, even if targets are aware of impending
or already-occurring attacks (when they receive malicious messages on a daily basis or are repeatedly
requested to reset their passwords), it is almost impossible to defend against attempts, making professional
guidance indispensable. the attackers try to overwhelm targets by executing numerous password-reset
attempts, making victims believe they are losing control over their accounts.
work versus private accounts and devices
the rocket kitten group prefers to go after victims private email addresses and other accounts rather
than their organizational ones. this is a clever move, taking advantage of their lack of peripheral protection
at home as opposed to in an organizational setting where monitoring systems are in place and security
personnel can help as soon as alarms go off. now, the attackers very well know that while in theory, work
and private lives are completely separate; in the real world, people use personal cloud services (gmail,
google drive, yahoo! , etc.) and personal devices (home computers) to store and share work-related
content. what this constellation creates for the attackers is a blissful chain reaction. first, they can gain
access to professional, work-related information by attacking and infecting unprotected, nonorganizational
access points. by extension, they are also able to use now-infected personal devices or accounts to breach
organizational computers and networks.|
infection vectors and malicious applications
social engineering and spear phishing
rocket kitten primarily infects systems via spear phishing. they send spear-phishing emails, sometimes
paired with social engineering techniques, to targets. they basically rely on psychological manipulation in
order to convince targets that they are who they claim to be. as an added layer to make emails even more
credible they use stolen documents that in the victims mind should prove their identity and mission.
rocket kitten targets primary victims but also secondary ones that they steal content from to reuse to
spear-phish primary targets. one interesting incident involves compromising the email account of a
famous israeli engineer to get nonpublic documents from him. these were then used to more convincingly
mimic the engineer in order to get to primary targets within his professional circle.
as previously mentioned, rocket kitten will keep trying to hit targets and won t rest until they do. this can
mean receiving the same email fve or ten times, perhaps with slightly different words, prompting receivers
to click fatal links. if one method or email content does not work, the attackers will resort to different
wording. rocket kitten, in this sense, is not only persistent but also very agile. the attackers: keep fnding new cover stories by making them up based on stolen information use various email addresses (faked or breached) use disguises (fake identities or usurped real ones), camou aging as people others theoretically trust make phone calls and send messages, sometimes even directly corresponding with victims in order to
gain genuine trust breach websites to set up phishing pages (google drive or fake gmail pages) or register new domains
solely for phishing
in a case we analyzed, for example, one of the targets sent a message back in hebrew, asking if the email
was real. the attackers responded right away, also in hebrew, confrming the email s authenticity. this
convinced the targets to open the attached fles.
fake profles: a case
one of rocket kitten s targets was lured into communicating via a fake facebook profle. the attacker
behind the fake profle communicated in perfect farsi. this fake profle was closed by facebook because it
did not conform to community standards. this prompted the attacker to just create a new account mah.
asf.xxx where xxx is a random number.|
while we found no evidence that these facebook accounts were actually handled by the rocket kitten
group, the conversations and additional emails from a sender with the same name strongly suggest this was
indeed performed by the threat actors. the target also received emails from [redacted]_asf@ .
this account s owner attempts to build trust and/or gather information. incidentally, this new fake
facebook profle also sent an invite request to one of clearsky s researchers, which we will go into detail
later on. in our experience, this is something that very rarely happens.
one more backdoor installer was found in the wild. this also communicated with a c&c server ( )
and usurped trend micro housecall.we found no traces of this backdoor installer in any spear-phishing
campaign but it may have been used by the attackers to infect the systems of targets that we are not aware
of. we just found it noteworthy that this installer has the same functions and uses the same c&c server.
malware used
rocket kitten s entire way of launching attacks suggests that the group is not very technically sophisticated.
the same is true about the malware they utilize. closer analysis of their code showed defcits and mistakes
that a professional cybercriminal would not make (the keylogger was badly developed and easily leaked
their file transfer protocol [ftp] credentials, for example). modifying an existing piece of commercial
code like that of core impact pro did not require a lot of skill as well.
most of the malware they use may not have been developed by the group s members. the threat actors
used off-the-shelf and low-quality tools that seem to have been self-developed or made by someone for
their exclusive use. the malware used to infect computers often showcased many extra features like stealth
(once a payload is placed in memory, any trace of the malware on the fle system is erased). a more detailed
analysis of the different malware types is provided in the next chapters where we look at one specifc tool
(a keylogger named tspy_woolerg) and analyzed malicious fles used in new cases.
a new version of tspy_woolerg emerges
in operation woolen-goldfsh, trend micro revealed the existence of a previously unknown keylogger
dubbed tspy_woolerg. this seems to have been developed by the rocket kitten group or bought for
exclusive use from a third party. this keylogger showed the following debug string in its frst-seen version:
c:\users\wool3n.h4t\documents\visual studio 2010\projects\c-cpp\cwoolger\release\ fake trend micro housecall installer: (sha-1: )|
we discovered a new tspy_woolerg version in the wild and found different variants containing the
following debug strings:
d:\yaser logers\optimizer\woolenloger\obj\x86\release\windows d:\yaser logers\optimizer tmp\woolenloger\obj\x86\release\windows d:\yaser logers\cwoolger\release\ yaser is a very common arab frst name. we couldn t fnd other malware families with similar debug
strings. we suspect yaser to be a developer who is part of the rocket kitten group or from a third party
whom the group may have purchased the keylogger from. yaser could also be the same person as wool3n.
h4t whom we exposed in operation woolen-goldfsh since the previous debug strings showed that a
wool3n.h4t was also in possession of the cwoolger source code. it could, of course, also simply be fake
information that attackers intentionally put there to lead us to a false track.
the new binaries we found were compiled between may and august 2015. the keylogger is basically
the same, yet a very basic layer of encryption has been added to hide the attackers ftp credentials.
very basic encryption used to hide the ftp credentials in the keylogger binary
the ftp server to which the stolen key logs are sent is currently set to /woolen/. previous
versions of the keylogger also reported to the ip address, , which belongs to the same provider,
singlehop. we noticed that some versions of the keylogger have had the upload function removed. instead,
another binary in the same folder that was externally executed was added.|
trend micro
detection sha-hash credential theft function upload key log fle name no no %temp% yes yes %temp% yes yes %temp% no
replaced
with %temp% new tspy_woolerg variants
the newest versions based on compilation date do not have credentials. this suggests that cwoolerg is
continuously being developed, not for updating purposes or adding functionality but rather to enhance
stealth so they will not be detected by security products.section 4
rocket kitten in action:
new attack cases|
rocket kitten in action:
new attack cases
case exploiting a clearsky researcher s identity
we made an interesting observation in one particular case where the attackers attempted to approach a
clearsky threat researcher using a fake facebook profle. when this attempt didn t work, they resorted to
other techniques. in the latter part of this june, the researcher received a phone call from another attack
target whom he had been in contact with during the thamar reservoir investigation. this other person
wanted to confrm if the researcher indeed sent him an email (which he actually never did). this is just
another example of the clever use of social engineering that the rocket kitten group adopted to go after
targets. usurping a threat researcher s identity is something we haven t seen until now. but it tells us a back
story. the attackers may either have had access to an email account revealing correspondence between the
researcher and the victim or they realized that they were being investigated by clearsky and exploited that
knowledge.|
send
new message
malware investigation; final step
hi xxx,
as per our previous conversations about virus found in your center, try to scan your
computers with this online antivirus.
it is from trend micro security company and can quickly identify and fix a wide range of
threats including viruses, worms, trojans, spyware and the recent malware:
trend micro housecall launcher
simply download and run the file and after updating, let it scan your computer.
regards,
xxx
attach save options
the attackers used the researcher s real email signature as camou age in order to send this legitimatesounding content to the victim:
spear-phishing email received by a target supposedly from a clearsky researcher
technical analysis
in this particular case, we can t reveal the victim s name or any other specifc circumstances but we did fnd
some noteworthy technical details, including: the email was sent using the address, clearsky.cybersec.group@ , which is obviously not
an offcial clearsky address that the attackers created. attentive recipients should realize that the
important information here lies in the address domain a gmail address but very often, they tend
to intuitively only react to the frst part of the name that indicates some kind of security problem with
their machines. the frst link in the email, trend micro security, actually leads to the real trend micro website, .| the second link that the recipients are supposed to click in order to download housecall, however, leads
to a malicious fle ( [sha-1: ]). the attackers choice to use the trend micro brand as lure raised a red ag. it could have either been
a purely random choice or a very cleverly chosen one. knowing that trend micro investigated on their
operations, they could have utilized this fact to create a false sense of security and trust with victims
who would probably believe it safe to download the vendor s product. perhaps this is also a payback for
revealing details on one of their operations. the malicious fle ( ) is a flex-compressed .sfx fle with a lot of obfuscation
and anti-debugging code. it has three embedded fles, namely: : only contains a path to the actual fle. file1: an offcial trend micro housecall launcher binary. file(sha-1: ): the actual malicious
payload a meterpreterstager. when the .sfx fle is executed, the payload is placed and ran in memory. no traces are left in the fle
system, rendering detection rather diffcult. it accesses the same ip address ( ), which belongs to iabg in germany. this service
provider has already been used in previous rocket kitten operations. the malware obfuscates every
application programming interface (api) string in its body (using a simple xor operation with the
value, 0xc4h). it also very carefully obfuscates its strings after use. the code is literally littered with several anti-debugging techniques (isdebuggerpresent, gettickcount,
and zwqueryinformationprocess tricks). the code only has one function to establish a connection with the ip address, , in order
to download a new binary. once connected to the c&c server, the downloaded binary is injected into a
process, which is, in fact, , from metasploit. it has several export functions.
meterpreter is an advanced, dynamically extensible payload included in the metasploit framework. it can provide complex and advanced
features that would otherwise be tedious to purely implement in assembly. developers can write their own extensions in .dll fles that can be
uploaded and injected into processes running on target computers after exploitation.|
list of export functions in the binary
in sum, the frst binary only contains instructions to contact the handler, read the 4-byte value (the size of
the fle), allocate the required rwx memory in the remote host, download the fle,
and through a process known as re ective dll injection, pass the control to the fle.|
the thamar gindin case: thamar reservoir
clearsky s thamar reservoir research revealed attacks against dr. thamar e. gindin, an expert on iranian
linguistics and pre-islamic iran, lecturer, and research fellow at the ezri center for iran and persian gulf
research at the university of haifa. the attack dates back to mid-2015. in an interview with the idf radio
station, she revealed connections to and communications with people in s not diffcult to imagine
that her pronounced opinions can make her profle disturbing in a certain context.
before clearsky s publication, the attackers already attempted to victimize dr. gindin using different
techniques, including: a malware-laden spear-phishing email three separate emails with links to fake log-in pages (including those that require two-factor
authentication), one of which was hosted on a breached website while another two had dedicated
domains two phone calls from the attackers designed to build rapport for the purpose of phishing numerous attempts to take over her cloud accounts using the providers account-recovery mechanisms numerous facebook messages and emails
it s interesting to note that clearsky s publication didn t really deter the attackers from continuing their
actions. rather, they kept on trying to hack into dr. gindin s email accounts even though she was already
aware that she was being targeted. this june, after the release of clearsky s research, dr. gindin received
notifcations from google that they received password-reset requests that she never made.
the attackers can be said to have taken the following steps: they created a gmail account with a username that only differed by one character from dr. gindin s.
they used this account to send emails with an excel spreadsheet attachment named message.xlsb
(sha-1: , detected by trend micro as x2km_
mdrop.a ) to several of dr. gindin s contacts. opening the .xlsb fle asks the recipient to enable macros.
http:// |
prompt to enable macros that recipients see enabling macros results in bkdr_swrort.cp infection. users see some academic content in hebrew
(a timeline of events for the faculty for 2015). what struck us is that the excel fle was created the same
day the email was sent. this tells us that the attackers customized the document for this spear phishing
and did not simply reuse old content. members of the group often seemed to use stolen nonpublic
documents as lure. this is a favorite rocket kitten technique. the backdoor installation is fairly straightforward. a fle called is created in the infected
systems root folder and executed.
reg add hkcu\software\microsoft\windows\currentversion\run /v my
app /t reg_sz /f /d c:\users\#username# {guid}.exe del temporary script created on an infected system
the script only has two lines of code: the frst line adds a run registry key to make the fle {guid}.exe persistent.
this is vital because it ensures that the backdoor will relaunch every time an infected computer
is rebooted. also, note that the globally unique identifer (guid)is unique for each run (for
example, c83519c4-c8fe-4ab2-9061-a6b3d7525fc9). randomizing the guid is a way to
bypass malware detection based on fle name. using the same fle name makes a piece of malware
easy to detect.
guid is a unique reference number. it s a 128-bit value that is unique not only within an enterprise but also worldwide. active directory
internally uses guid to identify objects.| the second line deletes the script in an attempt to hide the infection. the fle, {guid}.exe (sha-1: ,
detected by trend micro as bkdr_swrort.cp ) has been dropped prior to launching the tmp.
bat script. bkdr_swrort.cp is a small downloader that communicates with and downloads fles from the ip
address, . this ip address belongs to an iabg ip range (http:// /), a german
satellite communications provider that the attackers have been using for a long time.conclusion|
conclusion
the rocket kitten group has been around for a while now. based on research done by several security
companies, including trend micro and clearsky, we can assume that their activities will continue in the
near future, as they weren t deterred by making their existence and attack methods known.
we ve been observing the group for about a year now. the more information we gather about their tactics
and methods, the more we are convinced that what we are facing is a group of resourceful and persistent
actors. rocket kitten doesn t need sophisticated skills. the infection vectors that the group uses are very
simple. the malware they use are mostly purchased from third parties. but these shouldn t fool anyone
into thinking they re less diffcult to deal with. rocket kitten makes up for their shortcomings by being
extremely persistent and agile. the cases we analyzed in this paper show that careful planning and creativity
are involved when they attempt to gain access to and gain a foothold in a target.
targeted attacks are not only used for economic advancement via stealing. rather, they should be
considered an evolution of the tradecraft of classic espionage, even in geopolitical relations.|
appendix
general safety measures against targeted attacks be vigilant; share information. first, be vigilant. the second has to do with information sharing.
if you think or know that you are being targeted, it helps to be familiar with and conscious of the
attackers modus operandi. therefore, examining emails, websites, and other forms of communication
can help you identify threats and avoid infection. ask questions like do you know the sender? ; is
this his address? ; and does it make sense for him to use or send macros? when attack targets share
information with colleagues, friends, and family members, the attackers have a harder time fooling
them. and if security analyses are available to investigate suspicious emails, fles, and websites, it is
even more crucial to share information. this helps you understand their tools and methods, technical
infrastructure, targets, and, perhaps, even their aims and objectives. seek specialists assistance in case of an attack. even if you know that you are being attacked,
you still need professional guidance from specialists who can analyze incidents and provide realtime assistance. this is even more signifcant if attacks succeed. for example, attackers may execute
numerous password-reset attempts at the same time, making you believe you re losing control of
your accounts. without professional guidance, you can make a mistake like give your credentials
to an attacker, click a malicious link, or even neglect to inform your service provider that account
restoration should be canceled. the usual initial reaction to receiving suspicious messages is to delete
them. however, reporting suspicious messages to your organization s security team is crucial so they
can analyze attack methods, assess risks, and identify malicious content. regularly and timely update software. we can never repeat this enough oss and installed
software must be constantly updated with security fxes. use up-to-date anti-malware solutions and host intrusion prevention systems (hipss).
these software help detect threats. regularly run network checks. if you run a network, regularly check log fles or have them checked
by a security professional. this will help you discover malicious communication with attackers and
c&c servers.
specifc measures related to rocket kitten pay close attention to senders addresses even if they seem familiar. the fact that a message
is part of a previous conversation does not mean that it is authentic (it could be an indication that the
attacker took control of someone else s account). we have already seen email addresses with minor
changes used (one different letter in the address or domain and therefore seem identical at frst sight). do not enter your password on pages you were led to by links embedded in emails.
it s always better to manually type desired domain addresses, search for them on google, or use
bookmarked links.| inform acquaintances about attacks. they can become targets as well. known and trusted websites can be hacked and used as part of an attack infrastructure.
never automatically trust any website. always closely check websites and messages and look for
unreasonable mistakes (grammar, typos, etc.). immediately report suspicious incidents. you may not have adequate professional knowledge
and understanding of an attack. therefore, it is vital to notify your organization s cybersecurity team
of any suspicious incident. an example of this is receiving facebook messages asking you to reset your
password or informing you of unauthorized access to your email account from an unknown user. always ag macro-laden fles as very suspicious. report them to your security team except if
you regularly work with macros. asking you to enable content is very suspicious.
while it and security professionals immediately understand what the message means, most users
don t. nonetheless, you should become familiar with this specifc message (which is almost always
suspicious), as opposed to the protected view message that doesn t imply if opening a fle is safe
or unsafe.|
