threat
analysis
hogfish redleaves campaign
hogfish (apt10) targets japan with redleaves
implants in new battle idefense analysts have identified recent campaigns
attributed to apt10, also known as hogfish and stone
panda. this report provides a technical overview of the
bespoke redleaves implants leveraged by the actor in their new battle campaign.
idefense is providing information about this reported campaign to the general
idefense customer base so that customers are aware of the modus operandi of a
highly active threat group that is targeting institutions for espionage purposes,
especially in japan.
more specifically, this threat analysis is intended for security operations center (soc)
analysts and engineers. intelligence analysts may also want to read this report.
additionally, management and executive leadership may want to use this information.
soc analysts and engineers can use this threat analysis detailed information
pertaining to the workings of a malware family and indicators of compromise (iocs) to
contain or mitigate the discussed threat through monitoring or blocking. soc analysts
can use the information provided in the analysis and mitigation sections of this ia to
conduct hunting activities on systems that may have already been compromised.
analysts and security engineers can use the iocs by adding them to hunting lists on
endpoint detection and response (edr) solutions as well as network- and host-based
blacklists to detect and deny malware implantation and command-and-control (c2)
communication. intelligence analysts may want to use the information provided in this
ia to better inform their own analyses. the provided information can also help inform
ongoing intelligence analyses and forensic investigations, particularly for compromise
discovery, damage assessment, and attribution.
management and executive leadership may use this information to assess the risks
associated with the threat described herein to make operational and policy decisions
accordingly.
knowledge of the tactics, techniques, and procedures (ttps) used by the operators
behind this campaign helps to better inform detection and response to attacks by this
threat group.
hogfish (apt10) targets japan with
redleaves implants in new battle
redleaves analysis
the sample that idefense analyzed for this report is a word document with japanese
filename,, which translates to english as about the 2018 fiscal year (heisei 30) tax system . this document has the after the document is opened, the victim is presented with a message from office 365 to
asking the victim to enable content (see exhibit 1). on the next page, however,
idefense identified what appears to be a base64-encoded string.
exhibit 1: dropper document
the macro shown in exhibit 2 will then perform the following sequence of actions:
drop the embedded base64-encoded content into a new file, decode this new file by leveraging certutil , a legitimate windows program; the
base64 encoded data decodes to a microsoft corp. cabinet file, which is saved as use expand , again a legitimate windows program, to expand or decompress
file contents ( and ptl.aym) to the %temp% folder, and
consequently delete the earlier created files
exhibit 2: vba macro
as mentioned earlier, this malware creates two new binaries: and
ptl.aym. is a legitimate and digitally signed binary created by estsoft
corp. and pertains to alyac, korean anti-virus software. ptl.aym is in fact another binary
file; specifically, it is a dll file with the following properties:
the compiled time stamp, assuming it is not altered, suggests the actor developed the
implant 2 days before launching the described campaign.
this dll is a clone of a legitimate dll, also by alyac, and corresponds to the anti-virus
software s utility module. however, rather than the original dll, it only has two imports
as the authors have implemented a simple, single-byte xor obfuscation (using key 0x40)
to obfuscate other imports and strings. for example, xor decoding the binary reveals
the following two interesting strings:
as opposed to the original dll by alyac, which typically has 15 exports, the analyzed
three exported functions clearly stood out: initialize_ijdejk, nbhghuxigf, and
rgbkikbejobswsjy. these are, however, all dummy exports to throw off analysts or
perhaps even taunt researchers, and more specifically perhaps to taunt the japan
computer emergency response team coordination center (jpcert/cc).
for example, when executing the dll file by calling the nbhghuxigf export function, the
victim would be prompted with a windows message box with "jpcert-1 , as can be shown
in exhibit 3 and 4.
exhibit 3: windows message box creation
exhibit 4: windows message box with the message jpcert-1 all other functions are either empty or also filled with calls to messageboxa(), which is
unusual for dll loading implants. however, one export function, getfolderpathnew2, is
responsible for loading the redleaves dll implant by performing process hollowing in , microsoft corp. s default browser. the initial process, , is
unable to work correctly and will therefore exit.
for persistence, redleaves will add a shortcut .lnk file in the user s startup folder,
which points to ` , as shown in exhibit 5.
exhibit 5: in startup folder
once running, the redleaves implant will then attempt to communicate with the
following c2 domains, using http, but connects to the c2 server on port 443:
firefoxcomt.arkouowi[.]com the configuration settings for the redleaves implant can be extracted from memory and
contains the following information:
campaign id: 2018-1-8-newbattle the string 2018-1-8-newbattle refers to the campaign id set up by the actor and may
allude the actor starting a new battle (campaigns). the malware will create a unique
version of the aforementioned mutex on the victim machine in order to avoid running the
implant twice.
as mentioned before, redleaves will attempt to communicate over http, using post
requests with a hardcoded user-agent:
network traffic is encrypted with rc4 using the key babybear .
the redleaves implant has at least the following abilities:
take screenshots gather browser usernames and passwords gather extended system information send, receive, and execute commands from the c2 server
further analysis also reveals that the redleaves implant described corresponds to the
actor s lavender version of the malware family.
for example, the strings lavenderx and lavenderengin (which are dynamically
built on the stack) are used to determine the implant s version.
other redleaves implants
idefense analysts also identified the redleaves samples with the following attributes:
internal filename: c2 infrastructure
c2 infrastructure enumeration reveals overlap between the three samples that idefense
analyzed, as exhibit 8 illustrates.
exhibit 8: maltego graph showing campaigns overlap
mitigation
to effectively defend against the threats described in this report, idefense recommends
blocking access to the following c2 domains and ip addresses:
