exposing a systematic
hacking operation with an
unprecedented web of
global victims
april 2017
in collaboration with
executive summary
apt10 as a china-based threat actormotivations behind apt10 s targetingshining a light on apt10 s methodologyconclusion20
foreword
this report is an initial public release of research pwc uk and
bae systems have conducted into new, sustained global
campaigns by an established threat actor against managed it
service providers and their clients as well as several directly
targeted organisations in japan. given the scale of those
campaigns, the activity identified here is likely to reflect just a
small portion of the threat actor s operations.
this report is primarily fact-based. where we have made an
assessment this has been made clear by phraseology such as we
assess , and the use of estimative language as outlined in
appendix a.
by publicly releasing this research, pwc uk and bae systems
hope to facilitate broad awareness of the attack techniques used
so that prevention and detection capabilities can be configured
accordingly. it is also hoped that rapid progress can be made
within the broader security community to further develop the
understanding of the campaign techniques we outline, leading to
additional public reports from peers across the security
community.
as a part of our research and reporting effort, pwc uk and bae
systems have collaborated with the uk s national cyber security
centre (ncsc) under its certified incident response (cir)
scheme to engage and notify managed it service providers,
known affected organisations and other national bodies.
supplementary to this report, an annex containing our technical
analysis will be released.
executive summary
since late 2016, pwc uk and bae systems have been assisting victims of a new cyber espionage campaign conducted by a
china-based threat actor. we assess this threat actor to almost certainly be the same as the threat actor widely known within
the security community as apt10 . the campaign, which we refer to as operation cloud hopper, has targeted managed it
service providers (msps), allowing apt10 unprecedented potential access to the intellectual property and sensitive data of
those msps and their clients globally. a number of japanese organisations have also been directly targeted in a separate,
simultaneous campaign by the same actor.
we have identified a number of key findings that are detailed below.
apt10 has recently unleashed a sustained campaign
against msps. the compromise of msp networks has
provided broad and unprecedented access to msp customer
networks. multiple msps were almost certainly being targeted from
2016 onwards, and it is likely that apt10 had already
begun to do so from as early as 2014. msp infrastructure has been used as part of a complex web
of exfiltration routes spanning multiple victim networks.
apt10 has significantly increased its scale and capability
since early 2016, including the addition of new custom
tools. apt10 ceased its use of the poison ivy malware family
after a 2013 fireeye report, which comprehensively
detailed the malware s functionality and features, and its
use by several china-based threat actors, including apt10. apt10 primarily used plugx malware from 2014 to 2016,
progressively improving and deploying newer versions,
while simultaneously standardising their command and
control function. we have observed a shift towards the use of bespoke
malware as well as open-source tools, which have been
customised to improve their functionality. this is highly
likely to be indicative of an increase in sophistication.
infrastructure observed in apt10 s most recent campaigns
links to previous activities undertaken by the threat actor. t he command and control infrastructure used for
operation cloud hopper is predominantly dynamic-dns
domains, which are highly interconnected and link to the
threat actor s previous operations. the number of
dynamic-dns domains in use by the threat actor has
significantly increased since 2016, representative of an
increase in operational tempo. s ome top level domains used in the direct targeting of
japanese entities share common ip address space with the
network of dynamic-dns domains that we associate with
operation cloud hopper.
apt10 focuses on espionage activity, targeting intellectual
property and other sensitive data. apt10 is known to have exfiltrated a high volume of data
from multiple victims, exploiting compromised msp
networks, and those of their customers, to stealthily move
this data around the world. the targeted nature of the exfiltration we have observed,
along with the volume of the data, is reminiscent of the
previous era of apt campaigns pre-2013.
pwc uk and bae systems assess apt10 as highly likely to
be a china-based threat actor. it is a widely held view within the cyber security
community that apt10 is a china-based threat actor. our analysis of the compile times of malware binaries, the
registration times of domains attributed to apt10, and the
majority of its intrusion activity indicates a pattern of work
in line with china standard time (utc+8). the threat actor s targeting of diplomatic and political
organisations in response to geopolitical tensions, as well
as the targeting of specific commercial enterprises, is
closely aligned with strategic chinese interests.
apt10 as a china-based threat actor
apt10 as a china-based threat actor
pwc uk and bae systems assess it is highly likely that apt10
is a china-based threat actor with a focus on espionage and
wide ranging information collection. it has been in operation
since at least 2009, and has evolved its targeting from an early
focus on the us defence industrial base (dib)1 and the
technology and telecommunications sector, to a widespread
compromise of multiple industries and sectors across the
globe, most recently with a focus on msps.
apt10, a name originally coined by fireeye, is also referred to
as red apollo by pwc uk, cvnx by bae systems, stone
panda by crowdstrike, and menupass team more broadly in
the public domain. the threat actor has previously been the
subject of a range of open source reporting, including most
notably a report by fireeye comprehensively detailing the
threat actor s use of the poison ivy malware family2 and blog
posts by trend micro3 similarly detailing the use of evilgrab
malware.
alongside the research and ongoing tracking of apt10 by
both pwc uk and bae s threat intelligence teams, pwc uk s
incident response team has been engaged in supporting
investigations linked to apt10 compromises. this research
has contributed to the assessments and conclusions we have
drawn regarding the recent campaign activity by apt10,
which represents a shift from previous activities linked to the
threat actor.
as a result of our analysis of apt10 s activities, we believe that
it almost certainly benefits from significant staffing and
logistical resources, which have increased over the last three
years, with a significant step-change in 2016. due to the scale
of the threat actor s operations throughout 2016 and 2017, we
similarly assess it currently comprises multiple teams, each
responsible for a different section of the day-to-day
operations, namely domain registration, infrastructure
management, malware development, target operations, and
analysis.
apt10 withdrew from direct targeting using poison ivy in
2013 and conducted its first known retooling operation,
upgrading its capabilities and replatforming to use plugx. it is
highly likely that this is due to the release of the 2013 fireeye
report.
our report will detail the most recent campaigns conducted
by apt10, including the sustained targeting of msps, which
we have named operation cloud hopper, and the targeting of
a number of japanese institutions.
maintenance of defence assets and enable us military requirements to be met. operation cloud hoppertime-based analysis of apt10 s operations
shown in figure 1 are registration times4, represented in utc,
for known apt10 top level domains since mid-2016, which
mark a major uptick in apt10 activity.
mapping this to utc+8, as in figure 2, shows a standard set
of chinese business hours, including a two-hour midday
break. as part of our analysis, we have made a number of
observations about apt10 and its profile, which supports our
assessment that apt10 is a china-based threat actor. for
example, we have identified patterns within the domain
registrations and file compilation times associated with
apt10 activity. this is almost certainly indicative of a threat
actor based in the utc+8 time zone, which aligns to chinese
standard time (cst).
shifting this to utc+8 shows a similar timeframe of
operation to the domain registrations. there are some
outliers, which are likely attributable to the operational
nature of this threat actor, such as requirements to work
outside normal business hours. 4 the bubbles shown on figures 1 through 6 are representative of the number of events observed at that time and date.
when applying the time shift to the chches malware (newly
used by apt10) compilation timestamps, we see a different
pattern as shown in figure 5. while this does not align with
chinese business hours, it is likely to be either a result of the
threat actor changing its risk profile by attempting to obscure
or confuse attribution or a developer s side project that has
ended up being used on targeted operations. based on other
technical overlaps, chches is highly likely to be exclusively
used by apt10. the sum of this analysis aligns with the evidence provided by
the united states department of justice indictment against
several individuals associated with apt1,5 another chinabased threat actor, showing a working day starting at 08:00
utc+8 and finishing at 18:00 utc+8 with a two hour lunch to further this analysis, we have observed the threat actor
conducting interactive activities primarily between the hours
of midnight and 10:00 utc, as shown in figure 7. when
converting this to utc+8 we again see a shift to chinese
business hours, with operations occurring between 08:00 and
19:00. it is a realistic probability that the weekend work
observed in figure 7 may be necessary as part of operational
requirements. operation cloud hopperidentifying a change in apt10 s
targeting
apt10 has, in the past, primarily been known for its
targeting of government and us defence industrial base
organisations, with the earliest known date of its activity
being in december 2009. our research and observations
suggest that this targeting continues to date.
during the 2013 2014 period there was a general downturn
in the threat actor s activities, as was also seen with other
related groups. it was widely assessed that this was due to
the public release of information surrounding apt1, which
exposed its toolset and infrastructure.
from our analysis and investigations, we have identified
apt10 as actively operating at least two specific campaigns,
one targeting msps and their clients, and one directly
targeting japanese entities.
msp focused campaign
apt10 has almost certainly been undertaking a
global operation of unprecedented size and scale
targeting a number of msps.
apt10 has vastly increased the scale and scope of its
targeting to include multiple sectors, which has likely been
facilitated by its compromise of msps. such providers are
responsible for the remote management of customer it and
end-user systems, thus they generally have unfettered and
direct access to their clients networks. they may also store
significant quantities of customer data on their own internal
infrastructure.
other threat actors have previously been observed using
a similar method of a supply chain attack, for example, in
the compromise of dutch certificate authority diginotar in
20116 and the compromise of us retailer target in 2013.7
the command and control (c2) infrastructure chosen by
apt10 for operation cloud hopper is predominantly
referenced using dynamic-dns domains. the various
domains are highly-interconnected through shared ip
address hosting, even linking back historically to the threat
actor s much older operations.
at present, the indicators detailing apt10 s operations
number into the thousands and cannot be easily visualised.
the graph in figure 8 overleaf depicts a high-level view of the
infrastructure used by apt10 throughout 2016. as the
campaign has progressed into 2017, the number of dynamicdns domains in use by the threat actor has significantly
increased.
the graph in figure 9, also shown overleaf, extracts one node
of the newer c2 from the infrastructure shown in figure 8
and maps this to the older infrastructure of apt10, as
disclosed by fireeye in their 2014 siesta campaign blog
post8. in terms of timing, it is highly likely that a single party
is responsible for all of these domains, based on our
observations of infrastructure overlap.
through our investigations, we have identified multiple
victims who have been infiltrated by the threat actor. several
of these provide enterprise services or cloud hosting,
supporting our assessment that apt10 are almost certainly
targeting msps. we believe that the observed targeting of
msps is part of a widescale supply-chain attack.
msps therefore represent a high-payoff target for espionagefocused threat actors such as apt10. given the level of client
network access msps have, once apt10 has gained access to
a msp, it is likely to be relatively straightforward to exploit
this and move laterally onto the networks of potentially
thousands of other victims. this, in turn, would provide
access to a larger amount of intellectual property and
sensitive data. apt10 has been observed to exfiltrate stolen
intellectual property via the msps, hence evading local
network defences.
countries targeted
norway
france
canada
finland
sweden
uk
switzerland
usa
south korea
japan
india
thailand
brazil
south africa
australia
japan focused campaign
in a separate series of operations, apt10 has been
systematically targeting japanese organisations using
bespoke malware referred to in the public domain as chches .
while linked to apt10, via shared infrastructure, this
campaign exhibits some operational differences suggesting a
potential sub-division within the threat actor. these
operations have seen apt10 masquerading as legitimate
japanese public sector entities (such as the ministry of foreign
affairs, japan international cooperation agency and the
liberal democratic party of japan) to gain access to the victim
organisations.
targeting of these entities by apt10 is consistent with
previous targeting by china-based threat actors of a wide
range of industries and sectors in japan. this includes the
targeting of commercial companies, and government
agencies, both of which has resulted in the exfiltration of large
amounts of data.9
apt10 s standard compromise methodology begins with a
spear phishing email sent to the target, usually with an
executable attachment designed to lure the victim to open it.
analysis of the filenames associated with some of the latest
apt10 malware samples, particularly from late 2016,
highlights the use of japanese language filenames which
clearly indicates a campaign targeting japanese-speaking
individuals. further analysis of these files can be found in
annex b.
table 1 shows some example file names being used by apt10
in this campaign.
table 1: japanese language filenames used by apt10
japanese filename foundation of russian historical association and composing a unity state history the following is an example of a malicious decoy document referencing mitsubishi heavy industries:
figure 10: decoy document based on press
release from japanese firm mitsubishi
heavy industries detailing the unveiling of
their new ablaser-duv (deep ultraviolet
laser)
operation cloud hoppera notable tactic of this apt10 subset is to register c2 domains that closely resemble legitimate japanese organisations. table 2
shows a selection of the spoofed domains registered, alongside the email addresses listed at registration and the legitimate
impersonated domains.
none of the domains share identical contact information other
than stating that the respective registrants are based in the
us. the contact streets, organisations, and names are all
distinct between domains.
in the report. this connection is highlighted in the
infrastructure graph shown in figure 11 below, where some
chches c2 domains can be seen in the bottom left, while on
the far right are the older apt10 domains referenced in
previous reporting.
some of the domains, that do resolve, share common ip
address space with the network of dynamic-dns domains that
we associate with operation cloud hopper as detailed earlier
figure 11: infrastructure graph linking early plugx domains to recent chches domains
operation cloud hoppermotivations behind apt10 s targeting
a short history of china-based hacking
china-based threat actors have a long history of cyber espionage in the traditional political, military and defensive arena, as
well as industrial espionage for economic gain. some of the most notable of these events from the past decade are shown below
figure 12: timeline of china-based hacking activity
2006-13: apt1 conducted a
widespread cyber espionage
campaign against hundreds of
organisations spanning a number of
sectors. most victims primarily
conducted their business in english and
had a nexus with china s strategic
priorities.
2006
2009: the night dragon campaign
involved covert cyber attacks on
global oil, energy and petrochemical
companies and individuals in kazakhstan,
taiwan, greece and the us. the attackers
used a number of vectors including social
engineering and os vulnerabilities to access
proprietary operations and nancial
information
2007
2010: technology, nancial and
defence sectors were targeted by
operation aurora, a campaign
attributed to apt17/aurora panda. the
list of targets included google, who
suffered the loss of intellectual property
and attempted access to the gmail
accounts of human rights activists.
2009: ghostnet is the alleged
chinese group responsible for
running a global campaign starting in
2009 targeting foreign embassies and
ministries, ngos, news media institutions
and tibet-related organisations.
2010-12: between 2010 and
2012 organisations in the energy
and material manufacturing sectors
were targeted. these included
westinghouse electric, who had technical
and design speci cations for pipes, pipe
supports and routing stolen in 2010.
additionally, emails of senior
decision-makers involved in the business
relationship with a chinese state-owned
enterprise were taken. in 2012,
solarworld was compromised with
attackers stealing sensitive business
information relating to manufacturing
metrics, and production line information
and costs. it is thought to have been
targeted strategically at a time when
chinese manufacturers of solar products
were seeking to enter the us market at
below fair value prices.
2013: operation iron tiger is an
attack campaign attributed to apt31,
in which us government contractors were
targeted in the areas of technology,
telecommunications, energy and
manufacturing.
2009: three medical device
makers (medtronic, boston scienti c,
st. jude medical) were allegedly
compromised by chinese actors. although
the motive is unclear, patient data was not
thought to be stolen, making industrial
espionage the most likely intention.
2014-15: the personal data of over
20 million people was compromised
from the us of ce of personnel
management and attributed to china-based
actors. this included social security
numbers as well as security clearance and
job applications for government positions.
2013
2014: the data of 4.5 million
members of us-based healthcare
organisation, community health
systems was potentially accessed
during a breach attributed to apt18.
2014-15: several healthcare rms
were targeted anthem, premera
blue cross and carefirst all suffered data
breaches in 2015. these were linked
to apt19.
operation cloud hopperapt10 alignment with previous china-based hacking
espionage attacks associated with china-based threat actors,
as noted above, have traditionally targeted organisations that
are of strategic value to chinese businesses and where
intellectual property obtained from such attacks could
facilitate domestic growth or advancement.
there has been significant open source reporting which has
documented the alignment between apparent information
collection efforts of china-based threat actors and the
strategic emerging industries documented in china s five year
plan (fyp).10 the 13th fyp was released in march 2016 and
the sectors and organisations known to be targeted by apt10
are broadly in line with the strategic aims documented in this
plan. these aims outlined in the fyp will largely dictate the
growth of businesses in china and are, therefore, likely to also
form part of chinese companies business strategies.
the latest fyp describes five principles which underpin
china s goal of doubling its 2010 gdp by 2020. at the
forefront of these principles is innovation, largely focused
around technological innovation, with china expected to
invest 2.5% of gdp in research and development to attain
technological advances, which are anticipated to contribute
60% towards economic growth objectives.11 the areas of
innovation expected to receive extensive investment include,
next-generation communications, new energy, new materials,
aerospace, biological medicine and smart manufacturing.
in addition to the fyp principle of innovation, china is also
promoting ten key industries in which it wants to improve
innovation in manufacturing as part of the made in china
2025 initiative.12
figure 13: industries of interest outlined by made in china
2025 initiative
agricultural
machinery
next
generation
information
technology
numeric
control
tools and
robotics
medicine
and
medical
devices
aerospace
equipment made in
china 2025 industries
ocean
engineering
equipment
and high-tech
ships
new
materials
power
equipment
energy
saving and
new energy
vehicles
railway
equipment
observed apt10 targeting is in line with many of the historic
compromises we have outlined previously as originating from
china. this targeting spans industries that align with china s
13th fyp which would provide valuable information to
advance the domestic innovation goals held within china.
given the broad spectrum of priority industries, the
compromise of msps represents an efficient method of
information collection. this strategy also provides additional
obfuscation for the actor as any data exfiltrated is taken back
through the initial compromised company s systems, creating
a much more difficult trail to follow.
operation cloud hoppershining a light on apt10 s methodology1sto m erdata of interest to apt10
is accessed by the threat
actor moving laterally
through systemscustom
e
sp
compressed les lled
with stolen data are
moved from the msp
customer s network
back onto the msp
networkmsp
e
targ ted
d ata
msp customer data
collected by apt and
compressed, ready
for ex ltration from
the network
msp customers who
align to apt10 s
targeting pro le are
accessed by the threat
actor using the msps
legitimate access
apt10 ex ltrates stolen
data back through
msps to infrastructure
controlled by the threat
actor
m
apt10
apt10
compromises
managed it
service providers
geted ms
r e x ltr
this section details changes made to apt10 tools, techniques
and procedures (ttps) post-2014, following its shift from
poison ivy to plugx. these ttps have been identified as part
of our incident response and threat intelligence investigations
and have been used in both of the recent campaigns we have
encountered. the examples provided in this section will be
drawn from both of those campaigns.
figure 14: decoy document used by apt10 to target the
japanese education sector
reconnaissance and targeting
it is often difficult to identify the early stages of a threat
actor s preparation for an attack as these initial activities tend
to occur below the line of visibility. our analysis of the most
recently used decoy documents by apt10 in its spear phishing
campaigns, which is the primary delivery method of its
payloads, indicates the actor performs a significant level of
research on its targets. in line with commonly used apt actor
methodologies, the threat actor aligns its decoy documents to
a topic of interest relevant to the recipient.
in the example shown in figure 14 to the right, an official
document hosted on the japan society for the promotion of
science website was weaponised and deployed as part of a
spear phishing campaign against a japanese target in the
education sector.
apt10 has been known to use research from their
reconnaissance to obtain company email addresses, and then
craft a message containing either a malicious attachment or a
link to a malicious site.
figure
15: timelineof
ofapt10
apt10 related
activities
summary
activity
2014
targets east asian
manufacturer and
japanese public
policy organisations
2009
group rst detected
targeting western
defence companies
2009
q4 2014
targets european
organisations
2013
legend
apt10 activity
other events
q1 2017
apt10 sustains
targeting of
european
organisations
2014
2016
august 2013
fireeye - poison ivy:
assessing damage
and extracting
intelligence
as part of the same campaign, we have also observed an email
sent by apt10,13 referencing a scientific research grant
program, and targeting various japanese education institutes
including meiji university14 and chuo university.15 the email
included a zip file containing a link to download a payload
from one of apt10 s servers, the chches powersploit exploit,
detailed in annex b.
initial compromise and lateral
movement
once on a target network, the actor rapidly deploys malware
to establish a foothold, which may include one or more
systems that provide sustained access to a victim s network.
as apt10 works to gain further privileges and access, it also
conducts internal reconnaissance, mapping out the network
using common windows tools, and in later stages of the
compromise using open source pentesting tools, detailed in
annex b.
this reconnaissance is run in parallel with the actor ensuring
that it has access to legitimate credentials. we have observed
that in cases where apt10 has infiltrated a target via an msp,
it continues to use the msps credentials. in order to gain any
further credentials, apt10 will usually deploy credential theft
tools such as mimikatz or pwdump, sometimes using dll load
order hijacking, to use against a domain controller, explained
further in annex b. regular communications checks are then
executed in order to maintain this level of access. in most
cases, these stolen msp credentials have provided
administrator or domain administrator privileges.
we have observed the threat actor copying malware over to
systems in a compromised environment, which did not have
march 2014
trend micro &
fireeye release
reports on links
between apt1 and
apt10
2017
q4 2016
targets japanese
organisations
any outbound internet access. in one of these instances, the
threat actor spent more than an hour attempting to establish
an outbound connection using plugx until it realised that the
host had no internet access, at which point the malware and
all supporting files were deleted. apt10 achieves persistence
on its targets primarily by using scheduled tasks or windows
services in order to ensure the malware remains active
regardless of system reboots.
apt10 heavily leverages the shared nature of client-side msp
infrastructure to move laterally between msps and other
victims. systems that share access and thus credentials, from
both a msp and one of its clients serve as a way of hopping
between the two.
frastructure
ms
p infrastructu
re
systems sharing credentials across the client and the
msp are of particular interest to apt10, and are
commonly used by the threat actor in order to gain
access to new areas of the network operation cloud hopperapt10 simultaneously targets both low profile and high value
systems to gain network persistence and a high level of access
respectively. for example, in addition to compromising high
value domain controllers and security servers, the threat actor
has also been observed identifying and subsequently
installing malware on low profile systems that provide
non-critical support functions to the business, and are thus
less likely to draw the attention of system administrators.
as part of the long-term access to victim networks, we have
observed apt10 consistently install updates and new
malware on compromised systems. in the majority of
instances apt10 used either a reverse shell or rdp connection
to install its malware; the actor also uses these methods to
propagate across the network.
using these techniques, apt10 pushes data from victim
networks to other networks they have access to, such as other
msp or victim networks, then, using similar methods, pulls the data from those networks to locations from which they
can directly obtain it, such as the threat actor s c2 servers.
apt10 s ability to bridge networks can therefore be
summarized as: use of legitimate msp credentials to management systems
which bridge the msp and multiple msp customer
networks; use of rdp to interactively access systems in both the msp
management network and msp customer networks; use of t.vbs to execute command line tools; and, use of pscp and robocopy to transfer data.
communication checks are usually conducted using native
windows tools such as , and tc . the
actor will frequently net use to several machines within
several seconds, connecting for as little as five seconds, before
disconnecting. further details are provided in annex b.
network hopping and
exfiltration
once apt10 have a foothold in victim networks, using either
legitimate msp or local domain credentials, or their sustained
malware such as plugx, redleaves or quasar rat, they will
begin to identify systems of interest.
the operator will either access these systems over rdp, or
browse folders using remote access trojan (rat)
functionality, to identify data of interest. this data is then
staged for exfiltration in multi-part archives, often placed in
the recycle bin, using either rar or tar. the compression
tools are often launched via a remote command execution
script which is regularly named t.vbs and is a customised
version of an open source wmi command executor which
pipes the command output back to the operator.
we have observed these archives being moved outside of the
victim networks, either back into to the msp environments or
to external ip addresses in two methods, which are also
performed via the command line using t.vbs:
1. mounting the target external network share with net use and subsequently using the legitimate robocopy tool to
transfer the data; and,
2. using the legitimate putty secure copy client (pscp),
sometimes named , to transfer the data
directly to the third party system.
apt10 malware
we classify apt10 s malware into two distinct areas: tactical
and sustained. the tactical malware, historically evilgrab,
and now chches (and likely also redleaves), is designed to be
lightweight and disposable, often being delivered through
spear phishing. once executed, tactical malware contains the
capability to profile the network and manoeuvre through it to
identify a key system of interest. the sustained malware,
historically poison ivy, plugx and now quasar provides a more
comprehensive feature set. intended to be deployed on key
systems, the sustained malware facilitates long-term remote
access and allows for operators to more easily carry out
administration tasks.
since late 2016, we have seen the threat actor develop several
bespoke malware families, such as chches and redleaves.
additionally, it has taken the open source malware, quasar,
and extended its capabilities, ensuring the incrementation of
the internal version number as it does so.
we have also observed apt10 use dll search order hijacking
and sideloading, to execute some modified versions of
open-source tools. for example, pwc uk has observed apt10
compiling dlls out of tools, such as mimikatz and pwdump6,
and using legitimate, signed software, such as windows
defender to load the malicious payloads.
in annex b we provide detailed analysis of several of the
threat actor s tools as well as the common windows tools we
have observed being used.
timeline
alongside apt10 s ttps, we have observed a retooling cycle.
given the pace of technological change and the wide range of
freely available online tools and scripts, it is not unusual for
an actor to re-evaluate its capabilities and to benchmark
multiple offerings against each other. we have observed a
decline in the deployment of some of apt10 s traditional core
tool set, and witnessed an increase in the development and
deployment of additional new tools which combine in-house
development and open source projects. we assess that this is
highly likely due to the public release of apt10 malware by
cyber security vendors.
during our analysis of victim networks, we were able to
observe apt10 once again initiate a retooling cycle in late
2016. we observed the deployment and testing of multiple
versions of quasar malware,16 and the introduction of the
bespoke malware families chches and redleaves.
we assess it is highly likely that due to the frequent public
release of information linking plugx with china-based threat
actors, continual long-term use had become unsustainable,
introducing an additional operational overhead that is easily
attributable to china-based threat actors.
throughout our investigations, we have observed multiple
deployments of the plugx malware from 2014 to at least 2016.
this, along with the downturn in the use of poison ivy,
supports the notion that a major retooling operation took
place post 2014. additional analysis of the infrastructure
associated with each distinct version of plugx also shows an
increase in maturity over time. earlier plugx versions were
configured with legacy domains and ip addresses, which were
originally isolated and more obvious, whereas more recent
versions have demonstrated a standardised convention for
domain names and ip selection.
16 operation cloud hopperconclusion
apt10 is a constantly evolving, highly
persistent china-based threat actor that
has an ambitious and unprecedented
collection programme against a broad
spectrum of sectors, enabled by its
strategic targeting.
since exposure of its operations in 2013, apt10 has made a
number of significant changes intended to thwart detection of
its campaigns. pwc uk and bae systems, working closely
with industry and government, have uncovered a new,
unparallelled campaign which we refer to as operation cloud
hopper. this operation has targeted managed it service
providers, the compromise of which provides apt10 with
potential access to thousands of further victims. an additional
campaign has also been observed targeting japanese entities.
apt10 s malware toolbox shows a clear evolution from
malware commonly associated with china-based threat actors
towards bespoke in-house malware that has been used in
more recent campaigns; this is indicative of apt10 s
increasing sophistication, which is highly likely to continue.
the threat actor s known working hours align to chinese
standard time (cst) and its targeting corresponds to that of
other known china-based threat actors, which supports our
assessment that these campaigns are conducted by apt10.
this campaign serves to highlight the importance of
organisations having a comprehensive view of their threat
profile, including that of their supply chain s. more broadly,
it should also encourage organisations to fully assess the
risk posed by their third party relationships, and prompt
them to take appropriate steps to assure and manage these.
a detailed technical annex supplements this main report,
which provides further information about the tools and
techniques used by apt10 and contains indicators of
compromise relating to all of this threat actor s known
campaigns. these have already been provided to the national
cyber security centre for dissemination through their usual
channels.
