executive summary cylance spear has uncovered
a long-standing persistent
threat targeting numerous
major industries spread across
japan, south korea, the united
states, europe, and several other
southeast asian countries. the early days: spear phishing the earliest indications of the group s activities stem
from the compile times of the executable resource
section of misdat samples. all of the early backdoor
samples were compiled using a version of delphi which
notoriously mangles the compilation timestamp of
the file to june 19, 1992 22:22:17 utc. by using the
executable resource section timestamp, spear was
able to more accurately gauge the actual compile
times of these samples, and traced one of them, power comes in many forms our research indicates operation dust storm has been
operational since at least early 2010, and has employed
a number of different operational techniques, including
spear phishing, waterholes, and zero-day exploits over
time. several antivirus companies initially detected
early backdoor samples under the moniker misdat, but
the group has quietly evolved over the years to remain
undetected and highly effective.
attack telemetry in 2015 indicates the dust storm
group has migrated from more traditional government
and defense-related intelligence targets to exclusively
seek out organizations involved in japanese critical
infrastructure and resources.
the group recently compromised a wide breadth of
victims across the following industry verticals: electricity
generation, oil and natural gas, finance, transportation,
and construction. spear s current research indicates
the group s present focus has shifted to specifically
and exclusively target japanese companies or japanese
subdivisions of larger foreign organizations.
1 during analysis of older command and control infrastructure, there were several domains that resolved to known malicious ip addresses in
september 2009. however, spear was not able to corroborate these dates in any known malware samples. operation dust stormvery little public information was available throughout
2010 on this threat, despite the group s primary
backdoor gaining some level of prominence in targeted
asian attacks. this may be explained by the group s early
reliance on dynamic dns domains for their command and
control (c2) infrastructure, as well as their use of public
rats like poison ivy and gh0st rat for second-stage
implants. the actors relied heavily on the free dynamic
dns providers no-ip (http:// ), oray (http:// /) and 3322 (http:// /)
for their infrastructure continuing into 2011; the earliest
known backdoors spear identified communicated to and .
it wasn t until june 2011 that operation dust storm
started to garner some notoriety from a series of
attacks which leveraged an unpatched internet explorer
8 vulnerability, cve-2011-1255, to gain a foothold into
victim networks. in these attacks, a link to the exploit was
sent via a spear phishing email from a purported chinese
student seeking advice or asking the target a question
following a presentation. media coverage of these
attacks included http:// /
blogs/inside-back-door-attack , 2 and http://asec.ahnlab.
com/730 which named the early backdoor variants misdat .
the secondary c2 server from symantec s writeup was
mentioned in news reports elsewhere as ;
this domain resolved to during early june
2011. this address is coincidentally the same ip address
that one of the earliest misdat samples that spear
identified beaconed to during the same timeframe.
a paper published in august 2011 by ned moran via usenix
( /
105484- ) described in detail an attack by this threat group during april 2011. the attack was initiated by
a spear phishing email that contained a word document
embedded with a zero-day flash exploit (cve-2011-0611).
the final payload described in the report matched other
confirmed misdat samples, and beaconed to msejake.7766.
org , which first resolved to , then later to at the time of the attack.
as to other documented cases, the attacker started
interacting with the infected machine within minutes
of compromise to begin manual network and host
enumeration.
in october 2011, the group attempted to take advantage
of the ongoing libyan crisis at the time and phish the news
cycle regarding muammar gaddafi s death on october
20, 2011. it appears that in addition to some us defense
targets, this campaign was also directed at a uyghur
mailing list. this time, the group used a specially crafted
malicious windows help (.hlp) file, which exploited cve2010-1885. the hlp files, when opened, would execute
a piece of javascript code via , which in turn
launched a second piece of visual basic script using the
windows scripting host. this secondary piece of vbs
code was then responsible for decoding the payload from
the body of the hlp file and executing it.
the first stage payloads used in these attacks were
misdat variants stored base64 encoded within the hlp
file. the samples spear identified both communicated
to the domain , which resolved to the
ip address at that time. pivoting off
of this ip address yielded several additional dynamic dns
domains that were used for command and control, as
well as several standard domains that were used by the
group from may 2010 up until december 2015. early infrastructure for the 2010-2011 timeframe used
by the group relied heavily on two email addresses,
"wkymyx (at) and duomanmvp (at) ,
for domain registration.
the attackers typically used either seemingly random
four-character subdomains or common words like image,
blog, ssl, pic, mail, news, etc. there was also evidence to
suggest this group attempted to gather user credentials
for yahoo, windows live and other accounts through
several different phishing domains during july and
august 2011.
while spear was unable to recover the original pages
served, the domains these pages were hosted on
are: , ,
and . individual ip address
resolutions for each of the domains were generally shortlived, with none of them lasting more than a month. identity crisis: zero-day attacks spear identified another operation dust storm campaign
in june 2012 that leveraged both cve-2011-0611, a
flash exploit the group had used previously, and cve2012-1889, an internet explorer zero-day. the attackers used the domain to deliver the
exploits, and the domain was hosted on the ip address at the time of the attack. spear was
unable to definitively tie this particular exploit site to a
watering hole or phishing campaign, however, numerous
other cn-apt operators leveraged the internet explorer
zero-day during the same period using both techniques.
the exploit domain was registered shortly
before the attack on may 24, 2012. two different emails
were used in the registration of this domain: effort09 (at) and zaizhong16 (at) .
this attack was the first to use the file deployjava.
js to fingerprint installed software on victim systems
prior to delivery and ensure a known effective exploit
was deployed. this javascript file was first used
and documented by ahnlab a month earlier in the
gong da exploit kit: http:// /
securityinfo/secunews/ ?menu_
dist=2&seq=19418. the worked in
conjunction with another script embedded in the exploit
page, to deliver the flash exploit if the version of ie was
8 or 9 or deliver the ie zero-day if the version of ie was
6 or 7. also of note in this attack: the final payload (hxxp://mail. /pic/win.exe) was delivered encoded with
a single-byte xor against the byte 0x95, skipping both
the key itself and zero in an attempt to avoid exposing
the key. this method of obfuscation at the time would
have ensured delivery of the payload past most ids/ips
systems. the unencoded payload was a hybrid of the
older misdat backdoor and its next generation, the s-type
backdoor. the backdoor would first attempt to use the
old misdat network protocol and communicate to smtp. . if that failed, it would fallback to the newer
http-based s-type protocol which communicated with into the future: japanese targets the group completely abandoned older incarnations of
the misdat backdoor for their first stage implants in 2013,
and moved predominantly to the new s-type backdoors.
a full analysis of both of these backdoors is included in
the implant analysis section. there was some anecdotal evidence to suggest operation
dust storm leveraged an ichitaro zero-day cve-20135990 to target japanese victims. this zero-day was first
reported publicly on november 12, 2013. ichitaro is a
popular japanese word processing program designed by spear noticed a fairly large lull in activity from march
2013 to august 2013. coincidentally (or perhaps not),
mandiant released their apt 1 report on february 19, 2013
( /02/mandiant-exposes-apt1-chinas-cyber-espionageunits.html). activity didn t cease entirely, but the volume
of malware spear was able to collect during this period
was remarkably decreased. attack resolved to during this same
time period, the domain also
pointed to this ip address and was used in previous
attacks that relied on web-based exploits. the
intermediate payload was an xor encoded
executable common to other cve-2014-0322 attacks,
which ultimately delivered a variant of the s-type
backdoor to the victim. throughout 2013, the other incidents spear identified all
deployed the s-type backdoor exclusively. this year also
marked an epoch in terms of relying on dual persistence
locations in case the victim had lower permissions and
couldn t perform certain actions like writing to the
registry or certain file locations. older techniques like
using the startup folder made a resurgence during this
time period. operation dust storm also began to branch out in
2014 into establishing and finding alternative means of
persistence on victim systems. spear identified several
second-stage samples that needed to be installed as a
servicedll in order to work properly, as well as one that
functioned as a router manager for the normal routing
and remote access service. doing a simple search for
this registry key, hklm\system\currentcontrolset\
services\remoteaccess\routermanagers\ip\dllpath yielded numerous other pieces of malware; however,
spear was only able to identify one of the group s samples
that took advantage of this. several new domains were
also registered in 2014 to support expanding operations. beginning in february 2014, there was definitive evidence
to suggest the group used a watering hole attack on a
popular software reseller to deliver an internet explorer
zero-day, cve-2014-0322, to a number of unsuspecting
targets. the exploit itself was hosted on hxxp://krtzkj. , which at the time of the several new domains were registered during this time
period, which would go on to become the crux of the
group s operations for the next several years. figure 4: new c2 domains registered in 2013a company called justsystems. while spear was unable
to find the exact sample that delivered a misdat payload,
our team analyzed numerous other related samples. the
backdoors were encoded within the exploit documents
using a very familiar method of xor ing skipping zero
bytes and the key itself; only this time the key used for
encoding was 0x85. figure 5: c2 domains registered in 2014 and 2015 here and now: companies compromised activity in 2015 was significantly more interesting, and prompted spear
to begin studying operation dust storm s other activities. spear identified
a number of second-stage backdoors with hardcoded proxy addresses and
credentials. these proxy addresses revealed the attacker had compromised
a number of japanese companies involved in power generation, oil and
natural gas, construction, finance, and transportation.
in one case that transpired in early february 2015,
spear was able to recover the second-stage implant
delivered by a variant of the s-type backdoor shortly
following its initial reconnaissance. what caught our
attention was the fact that the victim was part of the
investment arm of a major japanese automaker. the
attack came just two weeks before eleven unions
representing japan s autoworkers demanded a monthly raise of six thousand yen.
the second-stage implants were also programmed and
compiled using microsoft visual studio 6, an archaic
version of visual studio that seems to be preferred by
malware authors. despite using an old version of visual operation dust storm studio, the backdoor is well designed by comparison and
provides a full suite of functionality to the attacker.
no antivirus vendors seem to reliably detect most of
the variants spear identified.
perhaps even more interesting was the fact that the
group adopted and eventually customized several android
backdoors to suit their purposes in the beginning of 2015.
the group rapidly expanded their mobile operations in
may 2015. the initial backdoors were relatively simple,
and would continually forward all sms messages and
call information back to the c2 servers. later variants
became much more complex, and included the ability to
enumerate and exfiltrate specific files directly from the
infected devices. the android campaigns was massive in comparison to
previous operations. more than two hundred domains
have been identified to date. spear plans to release
more information regarding this threat shortly.
spear discovered two more waves of attacks that
started in july 2015 and october 2015. interestingly, one
of the primary targets was a japanese subsidiary of a
south korean electric utility. similarly, spear identified
a separate intrusion into a major japanese oil and gas
company. the exact motivations for this particular
attack were unclear; however, if this attack coincided
with all previous operations, the most likely goals were
reconnaissance and long-term espionage.
