apt34
november 14, 2017 since at least 2014, an iranian threat group tracked by
fireeye as apt34 has conducted reconnaissance aligned
with the strategic interests of iran. the group conducts
operations primarily in the middle east, targeting financial,
government, energy, chemical, telecommunications and
other industries. repeated targeting of middle eastern
financial, energy and government organizations leads
fireeye to assess that those sectors are a primary
concern of apt34. the use of infrastructure tied to
iranian operations, timing and alignment with the national
interests of iran also lead fireeye to assess that apt34
acts on behalf of the iranian government.
apt34 uses a mix of public and non-public tools
(fig. 2) and often uses compromised accounts to conduct
spear-phishing operations. in july 2017, fireeye observed
apt34 targeting an organization in the middle east using
the powruner powershell-based backdoor and the
downloader bondupdater, which includes a domain
generation algorithm (dga) for command and control.
powruner was delivered using a malicious rtf file
that exploited cve-2017-0199. in november 2017, apt34
leveraged the microsoft office vulnerability cve-2017-
11882 to deploy powruner and bondupdater less
than a week after microsoft issued a patch.
figure 2. apt34 ttps in relation to the attack life cycle.
initial compromise establish foothold escalate privileges internal reconnaissance complete mission
maintain presence move laterally spear-phishing leverage social
media to share links
to malicious files accessed unauthenticated
mysql database
administration web
application brute force attack
against owa to access
exchange control
panel webshells rdp vpn access ssh tunnels to cs servers created shortcuts in
startup folder plink powruner psexec wmi rdp powershell scripts wscript plink elvendoor powbat helminth ismagent webshells including
seasharpee mimikatz key logger keypunch lazagne brute force password
attacks modified outlook web
app logon pages on
exchange servers softperfect
network scanner powershell scripts native os commands goldirony candyking powershell scripts
used for data
exfiltration via dns exfiltration via rdp compress data into
rar files, stage them
to an internet accessible
server, then download
the files exported email boxes
(pst files)
