chrysene
by dragos, inc. - may 17, 2018 the chrysene activity group developed from long-running cyberespionage activity that first came into the general public s consciousness after a destructive cyberattack in 2012 impacting saudi aramco. the group specializes in initial penetration chrysene compromises a target machine and passes the victim to another group for further exploitation. the group has been observed operating in at least iraq, pakistan, israel, and the uk, and is an evolution of previous campaigns focusing exclusively on the arabian gulf region. the 2012 shamoon attack targeted saudi aramco and disabled tens of thousands of workstations. a group called greenbug by symantec and oilrig by palo alto networks carried out initial preparations and network intrusion in advance of the shamoon event, according to analysis following the attack. this group also appears to have been involved in supporting additional attacks shamoon 2 in 2016. since then, it remains active and targets the gulf region of the middle east. chrysene targets the petrochemical, oil, gas, and electric generation sectors while shifting targeting outside the gulf region. it also features significant advancement in technical capabilities from greenbug/oilrig. in 2017, dragos observed new chrysene activity and malware infrastructure targeting ics networks, including watering hole attacks using websites unrelated to ics, to compromise victims in an attempt to steal credentials and gain access to victims machines. the group leveraged 64-bit malware that can only run in 64-bit environments and established unique command and control network (c2) capabilities. (full reports detailing chrysene s tools, techniques, and procedures are available to dragos worldview customers.) for now, the group appears to focus on penetrating networks and conducting ics-specific reconnaissance. dragos has not seen evidence of this group having any ics-specific capabilities that could damage critical infrastructure. rather, chrysene appears focused on initial network access and information gathering required for future activity directly targeting ics resources.