unit 42 has discovered a new cluster of malware samples, which targets samsung devices and korean language speakers, with relationships to the malware used in operation blockbuster. the specific points of connection between these new samples and operation blockbuster include: payloads delivered by the macros discussed in operation blockbuster sequel
malware used by the hiddencobra threat group
malware used in the 2016 attack on the bangladesh swift banking system
apk samples mimicking legitimate apks hosted on google play
although unit 42 cannot provide a full picture of the details surrounding the delivery of these samples, we are confident this activity targets korean language speakers who use samsung devices. based on this evidence we believe this new malware is likely targeting south koreans. the newly discovered samples show new capabilities not previously documented. a strong relationship between previously identified malware samples attributed to these campaigns and the newly discovered samples examined in this report. new malware cluster at the center of the cluster of new malware samples is a pe ( ) uploaded to virustotal with the filename . the sample requires two command line parameters to run, the first is a port number which the binary binds to, acting as a webserver, and the second is also a port number which is used for encrypted protocol communications. the first port mimics an apache server, using header values that apache would use and will serve different resources to requests on the port, depending on the user-agent header values used. some of the responses given are embedded in the original pe, whilst others are expected to be found on the local disk. the following javascript files are embedded in the resource section of : gets and sets client http cookie header values e.g. googleappcookie . redirects clients to gets and sets client http cookie header values e.g. googleappcookie . redirects clients to redirect all client requests to .
collect system information and invoke a system shell. these are used to accomplish the following: install and invoke an apk
write an elf file to disk on the client three nested apks which ultimately lead to a backdoor apk implant. this file is likely installed silently by visiting the next resource with an http client. further details on this apk follow below. redirect all client requests to a url which triggers a vulnerability in samsung devices to install an apk. the system name this pe http server is intended to execute on has a hostname of rumpus-5ed8ee00 . this is checked by during execution. besides the resources listed in the table above, it is important to note that expects additional files located on the system due to some of the resources referencing local javascript files. these include the following filenames:
we have not been able to obtain copies of these resources. related elf arm samples the elf arm file embedded in is written to http clients disks by the logic in . below is a table outlining indicators from this embedded elf arm. this elf arm file is one of three we identified. these elf files are similar to pe files named cruprox by symantec, manuscrypt by kaspersky, and clevore by trend micro. the elf arm samples contain lists of domains (used for deception) and ipv4 addresses (used for command and control). these domains and ipv4 addresses are used to generate crafted tls sessions similarly to the fake tls communication mechanisms in section of the operation blockbuster report by novetta. the elf arm samples choose one of the embedded domains to populate an sni field of a tls connection to one of the embedded ipv4 addresses. by doing command and control in this way an analyst observing the connection stream only sees what looks like (but is not) a tls connection to a legitimate domain name. the domain names included in are as follows:
related apk samples the purpose of is to cleanup and install a third apk with a sha256 hash of and a name of . is the final malicious payload. this apk ensures that it is running when the device is booted and provides backdoor capabilities to its controller. record the microphone
capture from the camera
upload, execute, and manipulate local files
download remote files
record gps information
read contact information
observe sms or mms messages
record web browsing history and bookmarks
scan and capture wifi information
below is an image of decompiled code from a main component of the backdoor. it shows the internal version number for this apk is 4.2.160713 it is unclear if this is an accurate representation of the number of iterations of development undertaken on this malware family, or if it is to give the apk an air of legitimacy. configuration information for is included in the apk as a resource named . the configuration information can be decoded using the following python function: this apk contains resources which reference legitimate applications of varying popularity. we hypothesize the inclusion of these resources are to disguise the application s true intent and to make the application seem legitimate. the inclusion of kakaotalk resources leads us to believe this apk is targeting south koreans. the image below shows some of the referenced mobile applications resources: relationships to known samples originally, the pe server was identified by its binary overlaps with the following samples:
when executing, both samples create the mutex fwtsqmsession106839323_s-1-5-20 which has ties to operation blockbuster and the attacks on the swift banking system. once this overlap in indicators was identified, and manual investigation began, additional overlaps began to emerge. additional functional code overlaps are found between the following samples and the pe server: these macros share the same logic as macros discussed by unit42 in previous reports. final thoughts it is clear that source code was reused between previously reported samples and the cluster of new samples outlined by unit 42. additionally, command and control ipv4 addresses were reused by the malware discussed in this analysis. technical indicators as well as soft indicators, such as apk themes and names, provide soft and tenable ties to the actors behind operation blockbuster and the hiddencobra group. attribution is difficult to confidently achieve even with an in-depth technical knowledge and large pool of telemetry to hunt through. without targeting and delivery information this report offers a partial perspective on this new activity targeting korean speaking samsung users. palo alto networks customers can review this cluster of newly discovered malware by examining the goingmobile autofocus tag. unit 42, before publication, notified both samsung and the krcert of the activity detailed here. we would like to thank both organizations for working so quickly with us.
