fireeye threat intelligence hammertoss: stealthy tactics define
a russian cyber threat group july 2015 security
reimagined contents
hammertoss	.txtapt29	.txtintroducing hammertoss
five stages of hammertoss 6.txtstage 1: the communication process begins with twitter
figure 1: hammertoss calls out to a twitter handle difficulty identifying accounts, discerning legitimate and malicious traffic,
and predicting the payload	.txtapt29: an adaptive and disciplined threat group	.txt10 he russian cyber threat groups that we
monitor frequently design innovative
ways to cover their tracks. in early 2015,
we came across stealthy malware which we
call hammertoss from an advanced
persistent threat group that we suspect the
russian government sponsors. we designate
this group apt29.
using a variety of techniques from creating an
algorithm that generates daily twitter handles
to embedding pictures with commands the
developers behind hammertoss have devised
a particularly effective tool. apt29 tries to
undermine the detection of the malware by
adding layers of obfuscation and mimicking the behavior of legitimate users. hammertoss
uses twitter, github, and cloud storage services
to relay commands and extract data from
compromised networks. using a variety of techniques from
creating algorithms that generate daily
twitter handles to embedding pictures
with commands the developers
behind hammertoss have devised
a particularly effective special report hammertoss works by: 2. visiting different
twitter handles daily
and automatically. 1. retrieving
commands via
legitimate web
services, such
as twitter and
github, or using
compromised
web servers for
command-andcontrol (cnc). 3. using timed starts communicating after
a specific date or only
during the victim s
workweek. 5. extracting
information from
a compromised
network and
uploading files
to cloud storage
services. 4. obtaining commands via
images containing hidden and
encrypted data. while none of these tactics are new, the combination of these
techniques piqued our special report apt29
apt29 has been operating in its current form
since at least late 2014. we suspect the russian
government sponsors the group because of
the organizations it targets and the data it
steals. additionally, apt29 appeared to cease
operations on russian holidays, and their work
hours seem to align with the utc +3 time
zone, which contains cities such as moscow
and st. petersburg.
while other apt groups try to cover their
tracks to thwart investigators, very few groups
show the same discipline and consistency. similarly, few groups display the ability to adapt
to network defenders attempts to mitigate its
activity or remove it from victim networks. for
example, apt29 almost always uses anti-forensic
techniques, and they monitor victim remediation
efforts to subvert them. likewise, the group
appears to almost solely uses compromised
servers for cnc to enhance the security of its
operations and maintains a rapid development
cycle for its malware by quickly modifying tools to
undermine detection. these aspects make apt29
one of the most capable apt groups that we special report introducing hammertoss w variant uses different methods to acquire
cnc instructions, either by directly
accessing a hard-coded website or
accessing twitter as an intermediary. e first identified
hammertoss in early
2015. apt29 likely used
hammertoss as a backup for their two
primary backdoors to execute commands
and maintain access if the group s principal
tools were discovered. we have identified
two hammertoss variants that give
apt29 alternative ways to communicate
with the malware. the developer appears
to name these variants uploader and
tdiscoverer.1 both variants are written
in the c# programming language. each 1. the hammertoss
backdoor generates and looks
for a different twitter handle
each day. it uses an algorithm
to generate the daily handle,
such as 234bob234 , before
attempting to visit the
corresponding twitter page. uploader is preconfigured to use a
hard-coded server for its cnc. it goes
to a specific url to obtain an image
with a specific file size. tdiscoverer uses an additional layer of
obfuscation by first going to twitter to
obtain a cnc url, before visiting the
url to acquire its target image. we will focus on tdiscoverer in this report. five stages of hammertoss
we have broken down the malware
communication process into five stages
to explain how the tool operates,
receives instructions, and extracts
information from victim networks. the
stages include information on what
apt29 does outside of the compromised
network to communicate with
hammertoss and a brief assessment
of the tool s ability to mask its activity..txt1 if the threat group has not
registered that day s handle,
hammertoss will wait until
the next day and look for a
different handle. 2. hammertoss visits the
associated twitter account
and looks for a tweet with
a url and a hashtag that
indicates the location and
minimum size of an image file..txt4.txt5. hammertoss processes
the decrypted commands, which
may instruct the malware to
conduct reconnaissance, execute
commands via powershell, or
upload data to a cloud storage
service..txt4. the image looks normal,
but actually contains hidden
and encrypted data using
steganography. hammertoss decrypts the
hidden data to obtain commands. 3. hammertoss visits
the url and obtains an
image. note: the images are
stock photography and
were not used by the
group. the tdiscoverer variants were originally named , and the uploader variants had a debug path containing . .txt special report stage 1: the communication process begins with twitter
1. hammertoss contains
an algorithm that generates
twitter handles telling the
malware to visit a specific
twitter handle on a specific
day..txta twitter handle is a user
id associated with twitter s
website. for instance,
fireeye s twitter handle,
@fireeye, has a url: /
fireeye. the hammertoss
algorithm uses a basename,
like bob, and appends and
prepends three crc32
values based on the current
date. an example, may be
1abbob52b, which would
have the url: hxxps://www. tweets tweet & replies bobby @1abbob52b july 29
follow #101docto.txt3a. apt29 s operator registers
the handle.
2. hammertoss visits
the twitter url related
to its daily twitter handle.
for instance, on july 29,
it may look for a handle
1abbob52b (hxxps://twitter.
com/1abbob52b). apt29 s operator chooses
to register a particular day s
twitter handle using the
same algorithm ahead of the
anticipated communication. hammertoss goes to the
twitter page and looks for a
tweet that provides instructions
on the next phase of the process. 3b. apt29 s operator does not
register the handle. figure 1: hammertoss calls out to a twitter handle h ammertoss first looks for
instructions on twitter. the malware contains an
algorithm that generates a daily twitter
handle, which is an account user id.
to create the handles, the algorithm
employs a basename, such as bob, and
appends and prepends three crc32
values based on the date. for example, 1abbob52b would have the url:
hxxps://twitter.com/1abbob52b. each
hammertoss sample will create a
different twitter handle each day. apt29 knows the algorithm used to
generate the handles and chooses
to register a twitter handle and post
obfuscated instructions to the handle s
url before the malware attempts to
query it. if a particular day s handle is
not registered and the url for that
day is not found, hammertoss will
wait until the next day to attempt to
communicate with another handle. hammertoss waits until the
next day to begin the process
again. apt29 typically configures
hammertoss to communicate
within certain restrictions, such as
only checking the twitter handle on
weekdays or after a specified start date.
this allows the malware to blend in to normal traffic during the victim s work
week or to remain dormant for a period
of time before special report stage 2: tweeting a url, minimum file size of an image,
and part of an encryption key if apt29 s operator has registered that
particular day s handle, he will tweet a url
and hashtag. tweets.txtbobby
@1abbob52b url: in the case above,
the tweet instructs
hammertoss to download
the content hosted at the
specified url, including any
images on the page. in the
example we will discuss later,
the tweet included a url on
github. tweets tweet & replies
bobby @1abbob52b july 29
follow #101docto hashtag: the tweet also
contains a hashtag with
information to allow
hammertoss to extract
encrypted instructions from
an image file. the hashtag
indicates that the hidden
data is offset 101 bytes
into the image file and the
characters to be used for
decryption are docto. figure 2: learning the url, image size, and encryption key i f apt29 has registered that day s twitter handle,
they will tweet a url and a hashtag. the url
directs hammertoss to a webpage containing
an image or images. the hashtag provides a number
representing a location within the image file and
characters for appending to an encryption key
to decrypt instructions within the image. in the
mockup of a hammertoss tweet in figure 2,
the hashtag was #101docto, indicating that the
encrypted data begins at an offset of 101 bytes into
the image file, and the characters docto should be
added to the encryption key to decrypt the data.
using twitter as an intermediary to deliver the
second-stage cnc to hammertoss allows
apt29 to dynamically direct the special report in figure 3 is a sample of the hammertoss tdiscoverer variant and a corresponding
snapshot of a twitter account page from one of its generated handles. at the time of
publication, a publicly available hammertoss sample had only five generic detections
in virustotal. the twitter account was active and contained a link to a website.
among unregistered
twitter accounts h ammertoss uses an
algorithm to generate
hundreds of twitter
handles annually for potential
cnc. many of these are
unregistered, as apt29 chooses
to register a particular day s
handle as needed and ahead of
an anticipated hammertoss
beacon. this small number of
registered accounts allows
the group to maintain a small
footprint.
other tools use twitter to relay
instructions, including:2 miniduke, a windows-based
backdoor that is a suspected
russian tool the sninfs botnet flashback, a mac-based
backdoor miniduke behaves similarly
to hammertoss by not only
using twitter for cnc, but also
by downloading image files
containing encrypted, appended
content. stage 3: visiting github to download an image apt29 s operator registers a github
page and uploads an image. hammertoss uses the internetexplorer.
application com object to visit the url and
obtain the image. figure 4: the url specified in the tweet (in this case, a github page)
contains an image with appended and encrypted data h ammertoss then uses the internetexplorer.
application com object to visit the url specified in
a tweet. we have observed urls lead to specific github
accounts or compromised websites.
we will use github for the next part in our example. once
hammertoss obtains the github url from its daily twitter
account, it visits the url and downloads the contents of the
page, including any image special report stage 4: apt29 employs basic steganography
1. hammertoss
downloads the image
from the specified url,
retrieves the image
from internet explorer s
browser cache, and
begins the process of
decryption. 2. though the image
looks normal, it
contains appended and
encrypted 2 h ammertoss downloads the
contents of the website to
internet explorer s browser cache
and searches the cache for any images
at least as large as the offset specified in
the tweet from stage 2.
while the image appears normal,
it actually contains steganographic
data. steganography is the practice of
concealing a message, image, or file
within another message, image, or file. in
this case, the image contains appended
and encrypted data that hammertoss
will decrypt and execute. the data may
include commands or login credentials to
upload a victim s data to a cloud storage
service. hammertoss locates the
encrypted data at the offset specified in
the tweet in stage 2. it decrypts the data
using a key comprised of hard-coded
data from the malware binary appended 3. hammertoss decrypts the image using a hard-coded key
appended with the characters obtained from the tweet in stage 2. end of file marker figure 5: encrypted data appended beyond
the ff d9 jpeg end of file marker apt29 adding
steganography
as another layer
of obfuscation we have observed only a few
apt groups using steganography.
hammertoss uses
steganography by appending
data to an image file after the
image s end of file marker. this
technique would be readily
detectable if someone was
checking for it. however, the appended data is encrypted, so
even if detected, the investigator
would be unable to decrypt the
data without key material from
two sources: the malware binary
and the current tweet.
indicative of apt29 s discipline,
the group ensures that if
network defenders discover the images, the defenders still
require the malware sample,
corresponding twitter handle,
and tweet with the additional
key material to decrypt the tool s
instructions. all of the samples
we have observed have used
different encryption keys to
decrypt the appended special report stage 5: executing commands and uploading victim data apt29 s operator creates the cloud storage account and can
obtain the victim s data from the cloud storage service..txt1. hammertoss may issue
other follow on commands:
powershell -executionpolicy
bypass -windowstyle hidden encodedcommand... he encrypted data in the image may include
instructions to execute commands via
powershell, execute a direct command or
file, or save an executable to disk and execute it.
in several cases, the commands directed
hammertoss to upload information from
victim networks to accounts on cloud storage
services using login credentials received in.txt2. hammertoss is capable of uploading victim
data to a cloud storage service. stage 4. in our github example, the decrypted
data instructed the backdoor to obtain a list of
running tasks reconnaissance on the victim
network and upload it to a specific account on a
cloud storage service using the login credentials.
apt29 can then easily obtain the extracted
information from the cloud storage service at
their special report conclusion difficulty identifying accounts, discerning legitimate
and malicious traffic, and locating the payload h ammertoss undermines network
defenders ability to identify twitter
accounts used for cnc, discern malicious
network traffic from legitimate activity, and
locate the malicious payloads downloaded by
the malware. identifying daily potential twitter accounts
requires network defenders to have access to
the associated hammertoss binary and to
reverse engineer it to identify the basename
and the algorithm used to create the potential
accounts. monitoring malicious tweets from
these accounts is difficult as each sample is
capable of generating hundreds of potential
twitter accounts annually, and apt29 may
only register a small number of those accounts
for cnc. employing legitimate web services that are
widely allowed in organizations networks some of which use secure sockets layer
connections that ensure the communications
are encrypted makes it harder for network
defenders to discern between malicious and
legitimate traffic. using steganography and varying the image size
makes the target payload the image containing
the appended, encoded commands less
predictable. even if the network defenders are
able to predict or identify the target payloads,
they need the associated hammertoss
sample and relevant tweet containing the
related encryption key information to decrypt
the contents. apt29: an adaptive and disciplined
threat group
hammertoss illustrates apt29 s ability to adapt
quickly during operations to avoid detection and
removal. for example, if an organization blocks
access to github, apt29 could easily redirect
hammertoss to download an image with
encrypted instructions from another website.
similarly, if an organization starts monitoring
twitter activity on their network, apt29 could
easily switch to using the uploader variant of
hammertoss, which does not use twitter and
communicates directly to a specified url. if an
organization identifies the handle generation
algorithm and attempts to research old twitter
accounts, tweets, or secondary urls, apt29
could easily delete previously used accounts or the
locations where images were stored.
while each technique in hammertoss is not
new, apt29 has combined them into a single piece
of malware. individually, each technique offers
some degree of obfuscation for the threat group s
activity. in combination, these techniques make it
particularly hard to identify hammertoss or spot
malicious network traffic; determine the nature
and purpose of the binary; discern the malware s
cnc method and predict its cnc accounts; capture
and decode second-stage cnc information; and
pinpoint and decrypt the image files containing
malware commands. this makes hammertoss
a powerful backdoor at the disposal of one of the
most capable threat groups we have observed..
