an al y s i s r e p o r t
disclaimer: this report is provided as is for informational purposes only. the department of homeland
security (dhs) does not provide any warranties of any kind regarding any information contained within. dhs
does not endorse any commercial product or service referenced in this advisory or otherwise. this document is
distributed as tlp:white: subject to standard copyright rules, tlp:white information may be distributed
without restriction. for more information on the traffic light protocol, see - . reference number: ar-17-20045 february 10, 2017
recommended reading about grizzly steppe
dhs recommends reading multiple bodies of work concerning grizzly steppe. while dhs
does not endorse any particular company or their findings, we believe the breadth of literature
created by multiple sources enhances the overall understanding of the threat. dhs encourages
analysts to review these resources to determine the level of threat posed to their local network
environments.
dhs resources
jar-16-20296 provides technical details regarding the tools and infrastructure used by the
russian civilian and military intelligence services (ris) to compromise and exploit networks
and endpoints associated with the u.s. election, as well as a range of u.s. government, political,
and private sector entities. jar-16-20296 remains a useful resource for understanding apt28
and apt29 use of the cyber kill chain and exploit targets. additionally, jar-16-20296 discusses
some of the differences in activity between apt28 and apt29. this ar primarily focuses on
apt28 and apt29 activity from 2015 through 2016.
dhs malware initial findings report (mifr)-10105049 update 2 was updated january 27,
2017 to provide additional analysis of the artifacts identified in jar 16-20296. the artifacts
analyzed in this report include 17 php files, 3 executables and 1 rtf file. the php files are web
shells designed to provide a remote user an interface for various remote operations. the rtf file
is a malicious document designed to install and execute a malicious executable. however, dhs
recommends that analysts read the mifr in full to develop a better understanding of how the
grizzly steppe malware executes on a system, which, in turn, downloads additional
malware and attempts to extract cached passwords. the remaining two executables are remote
access tools (rats) that collect host information, including digital certificates and private keys,
and provide an actor with remote access to the infected system.
open source
several cyber security and threat research firms have written extensively about grizzly
steppe. dhs encourages network defenders, threat analysts, and general audiences to review
publicly available information to develop a better understanding of the tactics, techniques, and
procedures (ttps) of apt28 and apt29 and to potentially mitigate against grizzly steppe
activity.
the below examples do not constitute an exhaustive list. the u.s. government does not endorse
or support any particular product or vendor.utilizing cyber kill chain for analysis
dhs analysts leverage the cyber kill chain model to analyze, discuss, and dissect malicious
cyber activity. the phases of the cyber kill chain are reconnaissance, weaponization,
delivery, exploitation, installation, command and control, and actions on the objective. this
section will provide a high-level overview of grizzly steppe activity within this framework.
reconnaissance
grizzly steppe actors use various reconnaissance methods to determine the best attack
vector for compromising their targets. these methods include network vulnerability scanning,
credential harvesting, and using doppelganger (also known as typo-squatting ) domains to
target victim organizations. the doppelganger domains can be used for reconnaissance when
users incorrectly type in the web address in a browser or as part of delivery as a url in the body
of a phishing emails. dhs recommends that network defenders review and monitor their
networks for traffic to sites that look similar to their own domains. this can be an indicator of
compromise that should trigger further research to determine whether a breach has occurred.
often, these doppelganger sites are registered to suspicious ip addresses. for example, a site
pretending to be an organization s user log in resolving to a tor node ip address may be
considered suspicious and should be researched by the organization s security operations center
(soc) for signs of users navigating to that site. because these doppelganger sites normally
mimic the targeted victim s domain, they were not included in jar-16-20296.
before the 2016 u.s. election, dhs observed network scanning activity that is known as
reconnaissance. the ips identified performed vulnerability scans attempting to identify websites
that are vulnerable to cross-site scripting (xss) or structured query language (sql) injection
attacks. when grizzly steppe actors identify a vulnerable site, they can then attempt to
exploit the identified vulnerabilities to gain access to the targeted network. network perimeter
scans are often a precursor to network attacks and dhs recommends that security analysts
identify the types of scans carried out against their perimeters. this information can aid security
analysts in identifying and patching vulnerabilities in their systems.
another common method used by grizzly steppe is to host credential-harvesting pages as
seen in step 4 and step 5 of the grizzly steppe attack lifecycle graphic. this technique
includes hosting a temporary website in publicly available infrastructure (i.e., neutral space) that
users are directed to via spear-phishing emails. users are tricked into entering their credentials in
these temporary sites, and grizzly steppe actors gain legitimate credentials for users on the
targeted network.weaponization
grizzly steppe actors have excelled at embedding malicious code into a number of file
types as part of their weaponization efforts. in 2014, it was reported that grizzly steppe
actors were wrapping legitimate executable files with malware (named onionduke ) to
increase the chance of bypassing security controls. since weaponization actions occur within the
adversary space, there is little that can be detected by security analysts during this phase. apt28
and apt29 weaponization methods have included: code injects in websites as watering hole attacks
malicious macros in microsoft office files
malicious rich text format (rtf) files with embedded malicious flash code delivery
as described in jar-16-20296 and numerous publicly available resources, grizzly steppe
actors traditionally use spear-phishing emails to deliver malicious attachments or urls that lead
to malicious payloads. dhs recommends that network defenders conduct analysis of their
systems to identify potentially malicious emails involving variations on grizzly steppe
themes. inbound emails subjects should be reviewed for the following commonly employed
titles, text, and themes:
efax, e-fax, efax #100345 (random sequence of numbers)
pdf, pfd, secure pdf
topics from current events (e.g., european parliament statement on )
fake microsoft outlook web access (owa) log-in emails
invites for cyber threat events additionally, grizzly steppe actors have infected pirated software in torrent services and
leveraged tor exit nodes to deliver to malware since at least 2014. these actors are capable of
compromising legitimate domains and services to host and deliver malware in an attempt to
obscure their delivery methods. dhs notes that the majority of tor traffic is not grizzly
steppe activity. the existence of a tor ip in a network log only indicates that network
administrators should review the related traffic to determine if it is legitimate activity for that
specific environment.
exploitation
grizzly steppe actors have developed malware to exploit a number of common
vulnerability and exposures (cves). dhs assesses that these actors commonly target microsoft
office exploits due to the high likelihood of having this software installed on the targeted hosts.while not all-encompassing, the following cves have been targeted by grizzly steppe
actors in past attacks.cve-2016-7855: adobe flash player use-after-free vulnerability
installation
grizzly steppe actors have leveraged several different types of implants in the past.
analysts can research these implants by reviewing open-source reporting on malware families
including sofacy, and onion duke. recently, dhs analyzed 17 php files, 3 executables, and 1
rtf file attributed to grizzly steppe actors and the findings are located in mifr10105049-update2 (updated on 1/26/2017). the php files are web shells designed to provide a
user interface for various remote operations. the rtf file is a malicious document designed to
install and execute a malicious executable. dhs recommends that security analysts review their
systems for unauthorized web shells.
command and control
grizzly steppe actors leverage their installed malware through command and control (c2)
infrastructure, which they traditionally develop via compromised sites and publicly available
infrastructure, such as tor. c2 iocs are traditionally the ip addresses or domains that are
leveraged to send and receive commands to and from malware implants.
actions on the objective
grizzly steppe actors have leveraged their malware in multiple campaigns with various end
goals. grizzly steppe actors are capable of utilizing their malware to conduct extensive data
exfiltration of sensitive files, emails, and user credentials. security operation center (soc)
analysts may be able to detect actions on the objective before data exfiltration occurs by looking
for signs of files and user credential movement within their network.detection and response
the appendixes of this analysis report provide detailed host and network signatures to aid in
detecting and mitigating grizzly steppe activity. this information is broken out by actor
and implant version whenever possible. mifr-10105049 update2 provides additional yara
rules and iocs associated with apt28 and apt29 actors. contact information
recipients of this report are encouraged to contribute any additional information that they may
have related to this threat. for any questions related to this report, please contact nccic at:
phone: +1-703-235-8832
email: ncciccustomerservice@ feedback
dhs strives to make this report a valuable tool for our partners and welcome feedback on how
this publication could be improved. you can help by answering a few short questions about this
report at the following url: - 