how fin7 attacked and stole data
sophisticated social engineering: phishing & calling
fin7 typically initiated its cyberattacks by
delivering a phishing email to a company
employee. each email included an attached file,
often an innocuous-appearing microsoft word
document, with embedded malware. the text
within the email simulated a legitimate businessrelated message in order to lead the recipient
employee to open the attachment and unwittingly
activate the malware that would infect the
computer. for example, when targeting a hotel
chain, the sender of the phishing email might claim to be interested in making a reservation with
details enclosed in the attachment. when targeting a restaurant, the phishing email might refer to
placing a large catering order or voice a complaint about prior service or food quality, further
described in an attachment. examples of phishing emails deployed by fin7 are below.
in many cases, fin7 would accompany the phishing emails with a telephone call to the
victim company employee about the same topic, which was intended to legitimize the phishing
email. the caller often directed the employee to the recently sent phishing email to further
entice the employee to open the attached file and activate the malware.
network intrusion: control & data exfiltration
once infected, the compromised victim computer
connected to one of fin7 s command and control servers
located throughout the world. through a specially
designed control panel, fin7 could download a wide array
of additional malware to the victim computer, remotely
send commands and receive data, and move laterally
through the company s network. among other tools,
fin7 incorporated and adapted the notorious carbanak
malware, which was used by other cybercriminals in a
massive transnational attack on the banking industry.
fin7 s malware allowed its members to conduct surveillance on company employees, including
taking screen shots and even video recordings of desktop activity, enabling them to secretly steal
credentials and other network information. fin7 then used its unauthorized access to the
victim s computer system to locate and extract various information and property of value, such
as financial information and caches of customer payment card data.
fin7 most commonly focused on fast-food and casual dining restaurants, hotels, casinos,
and businesses with a high frequency of point-of-sale transactions, including businesses with
dozens of locations operating in western washington. with these and other victims, fin7sought to steal credit, debit, and in some cases gift card data, used during legitimate customer
purchases.
selling stolen cards
since 2015, fin7 successfully stole data for more than 16
million payment cards, many of which have been offered for
sale through online underground marketplaces for stolen data.
the purchasers could then use the stolen card numbers to make
unauthorized charges on accounts belonging to unsuspecting
cardholders. investigators have observed typical retail
purchases as well as the purchase of gift cards.
who is fin7?
fin7 is one of the most sophisticated and
aggressive malware schemes in recent times,
consisting of dozens of talented hackers located
overseas. fin7 uses an arsenal of constantly
evolving malware tools and hacking techniques,
and controls infected computers through a
complex web of servers located throughout the
world. the masterminds behind the criminal
enterprise created a fake computer security
business called combi security, which they used to recruit new members and to add a thin veil
of legitimacy to the hacking scheme. however, there was nothing legitimate about the scores of
attacks fin7 launched against over 100 unsuspecting victims.